The Project Gutenberg eBook of Kazan
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
anything. You can copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Kazan


Author: James-Oliver Curwood

Translator: Paul Gruyer
        Louis Postif

Release date: November 14, 2023 [eBook #72127]

Language: English

Original publication: Paris: G. Crès, 1925

Credits: Laurent Vogel (This file was produced from images generously made available by the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica))


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KAZAN ***





  JAMES-OLIVER CURWOOD

  KAZAN

  TRANSLATION OF
  PAUL GRUYER AND LOUIS POSTIF


  PARIS
  LES EDITIONS G. CRÈS ET Cie
  21, RUE HAUTEFEUILLE, 21

  MCMXXV




FROM THE SAME AUTHOR


The Golden Trap (translated from English by Paul Gruyer and Louis Postif).

The Wolf Hunters (same translators).

Bari, wolf dog (translated by Léon Bocquet).

The Fierceest Hearts (translated by Léon Bocquet).

The Grizzly (put in French by Midship).


IN PREPARATION FOR:

The Nomads of the North (translated by Louis Postif).

The Gold Hunters (same translators).




    IT WAS TAKEN FROM THIS WORK
    FORTY COPIES ON
    LAFUMA PURE YARN LAID YARN (INCLUDING
    TEN OUT OF TRADE) NUMBERED
    FROM 1 TO 30 AND FROM 31 TO 40.


All rights of translation, reproduction and adaptation reserved for
all countries.

Copyright by Les Éditions G. Crès et Cie, 1925




PREFACE FROM THE TRANSLATORS


Like his brother White Fang, about whom Jack London told us
marvelously the psychological evolutions and the multiple
adventures, Kazan, which Curwood presents to us in this volume, is one of
these wolfdogs used in the American Northland (northern Canada and
Alaska) to pull the sleds. Mixed race, half civilized and half savage,
superiorly intelligent and no less robust, where the dog merges
and the wolf, and whose instinct is constantly torn between
human companionship, affectionate sometimes, often brutal, and freedom
reconquered. Subject that seems particularly dear to novelists
Americans and that they all strive to treat everyone differently,
with various effects and twists. What Curwood has, here, more
particularly portrayed in its dog hero, it is more than the influence
of the man, that of the woman on the big shaggy beast, capable
to strangle anyone with a single blow of his mouth, and who crawls, docile and
obedient, at the feet of a beloved mistress. And this is his dedication
also, his touching loyalty to his companion, the blind wolf,
of which he has become, in a hostile world, where the struggle for life is
without respite, the only guide and the only support.

This volume, like all those of Curwood, has the same attraction of things seen
and which the author faithfully portrays to us, who lives in perpetual contact
with them. A very distant universe for us, which is only more
seductive, and which draws us singularly from the contemplation of our
civilized world and our Western land. And always, according to
system which is dear to him, Curwood unites the tragedy with the alternating relaxation
spirit. Next to the sufferings of the Northland, he sees the smile,
when spring is reborn, and the healthy joys of physical energy and
moral, among those who live there. Faced with very dark pages, what
more delicious than the painting of the works and customs of the beavers which,
under the leadership of old Brokentooth, block the torrent near which
Kazan and the blind wolf established their lodgings, and constrained them,
whatever they have, to flee in the face of the flood. Let us add that in
Professor Paul Weyman, who took the oath one day, amazed at
their intelligence, to no longer kill wild beasts, Curwood
depicts himself, a once passionate hunter who, after having
massacred, became more broadly human.

Kazan and Louve Grise have a son, little Bari, who can be found in
another volume of Curwood, entitled _Bari wolfdog_, which is his
specially dedicated.

Paul Gruyer and Louis Postif.




KAZAN




I

BEWITCHING


In the comfortable house where he was at that hour, Kazan was
lying, mute and motionless, his gray muzzle resting between the claws of
its two front legs, and its eyes half-closed.

He seemed petrified like a block of rock. Not a muscle in his body
did not move, not one of his hairs moved, his eyelids did not
a flash.

And yet, beneath this apparent immobility, every drop of blood
wild which flowed in the veins of his splendid body quivered in
an intense emotion, unknown to him until then. Every fiber of its
powerful muscles were tense like steel wire.

The four years of existence of Kazan, where there was a
quarter of a wolf and three quarters of a _husky_[1] dog, had entirely
passed away in the immense and white solitudes of the Northern Land. There
he had known the pangs of hunger, there he had suffered frost and
cold. He had listened to the moaning of the winds on the _Barrens_[2] and
had flattened, under the terrible cracking of the storm, to the sound of
thunder of torrents and cataracts. Its throat and sides
bore the scars of the battles he had fought and, under the
bitten by the snow, his eyes were bloodshot.

  [1] The _husky_ is a variety of sled dogs used in
    northern part of North America, the “Northland” or Earth
    of the North, which extends, over approximately two thousand kilometers, until towards
    the Arctic Circle.

  [2] This name of _Barrens_ applies to the wildest and
    deserts of Northland.

He was called “Kazan”, the wild dog. He was a giant among his
brothers of race and his indomitable endurance was in no way inferior to that of
men who led him, harnessed to a sleigh, through the
a thousand perils of an icy world.

Kazan had always ignored fear. He had never felt the desire
to escape. Not even on that tragic day when, in the fir forest, he
had fought against a large gray lynx, which he finally killed.

Here, in this house, he didn't know what scared him. And yet
he was scared. He only realized that he was
transplanted into a universe totally different from the one where he had
always lived, and where lots of unknown things made him shudder and
alarmed him.

It was his first contact with civilization. And he waited,
anxious, that his master returned to the strange room where he had
leave alone.

The room in question was filled with singularly disturbing objects.
Above all, there were, hung on the walls, in gilded frames,
large human faces, which neither moved nor spoke, but which
stared like no one had ever done before. He
remembered one of his former masters well, whom he had seen lying on the
snow, motionless and cold like these same figures. And, after having
scented for a long time, he sat down on his behind, throwing away
its mournful song of death. But the people hanging on the wall, who
surrounded him, had the look of living beings. However they do not
didn't move any more than if they were dead.

Kazan suddenly perked up his ears slightly. He heard footsteps,
then voices speaking low. One of the two voices was that of his
master. As for the other... A shudder ran through his body as he
listening to him.

It was a woman's voice, a laughing voice. And it seemed to him
remember, as in a dream, a similar voice, which carried
she sweetness and happiness, and who had, in the distant times of her childhood,
sounded like this in his ear.

He raised his head, while his master and the one who
accompanied him. And he stared at them both with his reddish eyes.

He thus knew that the young woman was dear to the master, because he
wrapped his arm around him. In the light of the flames of the hearth, he saw that the
hair of the pretty creature was blond and golden, that her face
was pink like the autumn vine and her bright eyes were
like two blue flowers.

When she saw him, she let out a little cry and rushed towards him.

--Stop, dear friend! said the master quickly, and be careful. The beast
is dangerous...

But already the young woman was kneeling near Kazan, fine and
as cute as a bird, and so pretty, with her eyes that lit up
wonderfully and her little hands ready to land on the big one
dog.

Kazan, completely perplexed, wondered what he should do.
Should he tense his muscles, ready to lunge and bite? Wife
was it of the nature of the menacing things hanging on the wall, and its
enemy? Was it necessary, without delay, to leap towards its white throat and
strangle him?

He saw the master rushing, pale as death...

Without being frightened, however, the young woman lowered her hand to the
head of Kazan, all the nerves of his body had quivered at this
touching. In both hands she took the wolfdog's head and
turned towards her. Then, inclining her face close, she murmured,
prey to a violent emotion:

--So, it is you who are Kazan, my dear, my old Kazan, my
hero dog. It was you, he told me, who saved his life and who
brought him back here, while the rest of the team was dead!
You are my hero...

And, the face approaching him, closer, closer still, Kazan, oh
miracle among miracles, felt through his fur, the contact
soft and warm. He didn't move anymore. He barely dared to breathe.

A long time passed before the young woman raised her face.
When she stood up, there were tears in her blue eyes and
the man, above the group she formed with Kazan, continued to
clench your fists and jaws.

--This is madness! he said. Never (and his voice was jerky and
filled with astonishment) I never saw him allow anyone to touch him
with his bare hand. Isabelle, step back, please!... But look at him,
good heaven!

Kazan was now moaning softly. His fiery eyes were fixed
on the young woman's face. He seemed to beg again
the caress of his hand, the brush of his face. A desire had taken hold
from him, to stand up towards her. If he dared, he thought, would he
beaten with a club? No malice, however, was in him.

Inch by inch he crawled towards the young woman and he heard that the
master said:

--Strange, strange... Isabelle, look at him!

He shivered, undecided. But no blow fell on him, for
back. His cold muzzle touched the light dress, and the woman with
moist eyes looked at him.

--See, see! she whispered.

Half an inch, then an inch and two inches again, and his enormous body
gray was right against the young woman. Now his muzzle was rising
slowly, from the feet to the knee, then towards the cozy little hand, which
was hanging. And, during this time, he did not take his eyes off the face
of Isabelle. He saw a shiver run down the white and bare throat, and the
Purple lips tremble slightly.

She herself seemed quite surprised at what was happening. The astonishment
of the master was not less. With his arm he embraced the body again
of his companion, and with his free hand he stroked Kazan on the head.

Kazan did not like the man's touch, even though this man was
his master. His nature and experience had taught him to distrust
human hands. However, he let it happen, because he thought he understood
that the young woman liked it.

And the master spoke to him in turn. His voice had softened.

--Kazan, my old boy, he said, you don't want to, do you?
do no harm? We both like him. How could he
be otherwise? It is our common good. She's ours, just ours
We. And, if necessary, to protect it, we would fight to
she like two real devils, isn't she, Kazan?

Then they left him there, on the travel blanket they had given him.
given to lie down, and he saw them coming and going in the
bedroom. He didn't take his eyes off them, he listened, without understanding,
what they were saying, and an intense desire welled up within him to crawl
towards them again, to touch the woman's hand again, her dress or
his foot.

There was a moment when the man said something to the young woman. To the
following which, this one, jumping in the air with a little silvery laugh,
ran towards a large square box, which was placed across, in
one of the corners of the room.

This bizarre box had, over a length which exceeded that of the
Kazan's body, a row of white teeth, aligned flat, some
next to the others. When he entered the room, Kazan had
asked what these teeth could be used for. It was on them that
the young woman's fingers had just rested, and now there were sounds
melodious had resounded, which had never been equaled, for the ear
of the wolfdog, the gentle murmur of the winds in the leaves, nor
the harmony of the water of waterfalls and rapids, nor the trills
birds in the spring season.

It was the first time Kazan heard civilized music
and for a moment he was very frightened and trembled. Then he felt
dissipate his fear and singular resonances ring through all his
body. He sat on his behind and the urge took him to scream like
it often made, in the great White Desert, to the myriads of stars
from the sky, during the cold winter nights.

But another feeling held him back, that of the young woman he had
behind him. Silently, he resumed his crawling towards her.

He felt his master's eyes on him and stopped. Then he started again
to come forward, his whole body flattened on the floor. He was at
halfway, when the sounds became softer and lower, as if they
were going to go out, and he heard his master saying quickly,
half voice:

--Keep going, keep going... Don't stop!

The young woman turned her head. She saw Kazan face down against the
ground, and continued playing.

The master's gaze was now powerless to restrain the animal.
Kazan did not stop again until his muzzle touched the swirls of
the dress that was spread out on the floor. And a tremor, again, the
seizes. The woman had started to sing.

Kazan had of course already heard a young Redskin humming in front of his
tries the tunes of his country. He had also heard the wild _Song
of Caribou_[3]. But nothing he had heard yet of the voice
human could not compare to the divine honey which flowed from the lips of
the young lady.

  [3] The cariboo, or caribou, is a type of reindeer that lives in the
    American Northland.

He shrank, trying to make himself small, for fear of being beaten,
and looked up at her. She looked at him too, with
kindness, and he laid his head on his knees. The hand, a second
time, caressed him and he closed his eyes blissfully, with a big sigh.

Music and singing were silent. Kazan heard above his head a
light rustling, where there was both laughter and emotion,
while the master grumbled:

--I always loved this old rascal... But, all the same, I don't
would never have thought him capable of such a comedy!




II

THE RETURN TO THE NORTHERN LAND


Other happy days were to follow for Kazan, in the comfortable
residence where Thorpe, his master, had come to rest near his young
woman, far from the North Land.

He probably missed the thick forests and the vast fields of
snow, and the joys of the battle with the other dogs when, harnessed
at their head and their threatening bays at his heels, he pulled the
master's sleigh through the glades and Barrens. He
was surprised to no longer hear the _Kouche! Kouche! Woo-yah!_ du
driver of the sleigh and the formidable crack of the immense whip,
twenty feet long, made of caribou gut, always ready to
sting and sting the yelping pack whose shoulders aligned
behind him. But another thing, infinitely sweet, affection
bewitcher of a woman, had come to take the place of what
missing.

This mysterious charm floated incessantly around him; even
when _she_ had gone out, he remained scattered in the room and
occupied his solitude. Sometimes, during the night, feeling near him
the smell of the young woman, Kazan began to moan and whine
timidly. One morning, as he had spent part of the night
running under the stars, Thorpe's wife found him curled up and huddled
right against the door of the house. She then leaned towards him,
had hugged him and enveloped him, like a cloud, in
scent of her long hair. And always since then, if Kazan, in the evening,
hadn't come home, she had placed a blanket on the threshold of the
door, so that he could sleep comfortably there. He knew that _she_
was behind this door and he was resting happy.

So much so that, every day more, Kazan forgot the desert and
was attached, with a more passionate affection, to the young woman. It
was like this for about fifteen weeks.

But a moment came when a change began to take shape. There's
there was an unusual movement in the house, all around Kazan,
an inexplicable agitation, and the woman turned her attention away from him.
A vague uneasiness took hold of him. He sniffed the event in the air
who was getting ready. He tried to read on his master's face what
he could meditate well.

Then, one morning, the solid sinew necklace[4], with the chain
iron which was attached to it, was attached again to Kazan's neck, and the
master wanted to pull him onto the road. What did we want from him? Without doubt, we
kicked him out of the house. He sat flatly on his behind and refused
to move.

  [4] Very strong belt, made of intertwined strips of cowhides
    caribou.

The master insisted.

--Come, Kazan! he said, in a caressing voice. Come on, my little one!

But the animal pulled back and showed its fangs. He expected the
the sting of a whip or the blow of a club. It did not happen. THE
master laughed and went back into the house with him.

Kazan obediently came out shortly after. Isabelle accompanied him,
hand placed on his head. It was she again who invited him to jump from a
leap into the dark interior of a sort of car in front of which they
had arrived. She again who lured him into the darkest corner of
this car, where the master attached the chain. After which, he and she
came out laughing loudly, like two children.

For many hours, Kazan then remained lying down, stiff and
motionless, listening to the strange and noisy rolling of the wheels beneath him,
while from time to time shrill sounds resounded. Several
Once the wheels stopped and he heard voices outside.

Finally, at one last stop, he recognized with certainty a voice which
was familiar to him. He stood up, pulled on his chain and whined. There
door of the strange car slid in its grooves and a man appeared,
carrying a lantern and followed by his master.

Kazan paid no attention to them. He took a quick look outside and,
barely letting himself be detached, he jumped onto the white snow. Born
finding what he was looking for, he stood up and sniffed the air.

Above his head were the same stars he had
screamed, all his life. Around him, encircling him like a wall,
the black, silent forests stretched to the horizon. To some
in the distance was a group of other lanterns.

Thorpe took the one his companion was holding and raised it into the air. To this
signal, a voice came out of the night, calling:

--Kaa...aa...zan!

Kazan spun around and took off like a speedster. His master
followed, laughing and grumbling:

--Old pirate!

When he joined the dog, among the group of lanterns, Thorpe
found who was crawling at Isabelle's feet. She picked up the chain.

--Dear friend, said Thorpe, he is your dog and he himself came here to
put back under your law. But let's continue to be careful with him, because
the native air can awaken its ferocity. There is a wolf in him and
the _outlaw_[5]. I saw him tear off the hand of an Indian, of a simple
snapping of his jaw, and, with a bite of his teeth, cutting the vein
jugular of another dog. Obviously, he saved my life... And
yet I cannot trust him. Let's beware!

  [5] _Outlaw_, outlaw. It is commonly said that wolves are the
    outlaws of the North Land.

Thorpe had not finished until, as if to prove him right, Kazan
uttered the growl of a ferocious beast, curling his lips and
baring its long fangs. The hair on his back stood up.

Thorpe had already reached for the revolver he had in his belt.
But Kazan was not angry with him.

Another form had indeed just emerged from the shadows and made its
appearance in the lights. It was Mac Cready, the guide who was to,
from the terminus point of the railway where they had got off,
accompany Thorpe and his young wife to the River encampment
Red, where the master of Kazan, his leave over, returned to direct
the work of the transcontinental railway intended to connect, to
across Canada, from the Atlantic to the Pacific[6].

  [6] The Canadian transcontinental leaves, on the Atlantic, from Halifax and
    of Nova Scotia, passes north of Great Lake Superior, which
    marks the border between the United States and Canada, and, after a
    route of 5,000 kilometers, ends in the Pacific, on the coast of
    Vancouver.

The man's jaw was square, almost bestial, and in his eyes
cheeky men, who stared at Isabelle, suddenly had the same
glimmers of wild desire which sometimes passed through the eyes of
Kazan, when he was contemplating the young woman.

Isabelle and the wolfdog were the only ones to perceive these lights
fugitives. Thorpe's wife's red woolen beret had slipped
towards her shoulder, discovering the warm gold of her hair, which shone
under the pale glow of the lanterns. She remained silent, while
her cheeks flushed and two diamonds lit up in her
offended eyes. MacCready lowered his gaze to hers and she
instinctively pressed his hand on Kazan's head.

The animal continued to growl towards the man and the threat that rolled in
his throat was getting more and more hoarse. Isabelle gave to the chain
a slight shake.

--Lie down, Kazan! she ordered.

At her voice, he relaxed a little.

--Lie down, she repeated, pressing harder on Kazan's head, which
fell at his feet, lips still curled. Thorpe
observed the scene and was surprised at the poorly contained hatred that burned
in the eyes of the wolfdog.

Suddenly the guide unfurled his long dog whip. His physiognomy
hardened, and forgetting the two blue eyes which never left him
point, he began to automatically stare at Kazan.

--Whoa! Kouche! Here, Pedro! he shouted.

But Kazan did not move.

MacCready tensed his muscles. Describing in the night a vast and
quickly spiraling with the immense thong of his whip, he cracked it,
with a noise similar to the report of a gun. And he repeated:

--Here! Pedro! Here!

Kazan began to growl dully again. But nothing about him moved
always. MacCready turned to Thorpe.

--It's curious, he said. I could have sworn I knew this dog. If
It's Pedro, as I believe, he's bad.

His gaze returned to that of Isabelle and the same flame flashed there
new. She shivered. Already, when, when getting off the train, this
man had held out his hand to her, she had felt, by his appearance, his blood
freeze. But, controlling her emotion, she remembered the stories that
had often made her husband of these rough men who lived in
the northern forests. He had shown them to her a little crude, but
energetic and virile, and loyal, and she had learned, before coming
close to them, to admire and love them.

She repressed the instinctive aversion she felt for MacCready
and, calling out to him with a smile:

--The dog, she said kindly, doesn't like you. Would you like me to
reconciles you with him?

She leaned over Kazan, whose chain Thorpe had taken in his hand,
ready to hold him back, if necessary.

MacCready also bent towards the dog. His face and that of Isabelle
almost met. The guide saw, a few inches from his mouth,
the mouth of the young woman who, a little harmonious pout at the corner of
lip, chastised Kazan and tried to suppress his grunts
in his throat. Mac Cready, taking advantage of what Thorpe, to whom he was turning
the back, could not see it, began to stare again at the young woman, who
seemed to interest him infinitely more than Kazan.

--Do as I do, she said. Caress it...

But Mac Cready had already recovered.

--You are brave! he replied. I wouldn't dare. He would tear me away
the hand.

We set off, along a narrow path which traced its trail along the
snow.

After crossing a thick wood of fir trees which concealed it, we
soon arrived at the camp, which Thorpe had abandoned for a fortnight
before, and where he returned accompanied by his young wife. His tent, where
he had lived in the company of his former guide, was still there and a
new one, which was intended for Mac Cready, stood right next to it.

A large fire was burning, and near the fire was a long sleigh. Related to
neighboring trees, shadowy shapes, with glowing eyes, were those
old companions that Kazan had just found. He
stiffened, motionless, while Thorpe attached his chain to the wood of the
sled. He was going to start again, in his forests, the customary existence
and its role as leader of other dogs.

Curious about the surprising and new life for her, from which she was going
now take her part, Isabelle had fun with everything and beat
happily waving their hands. Thorpe, lifting and throwing back the door
canvas of the tent, invited him to enter it before him. As she was
entry without a backward glance towards Kazan, without a word addressed to him,
he was greatly saddened and, with a groan, turned his eyes
to Mac Cready.

Inside the tent Thorpe said:

--I am sorry, dear friend, that old Jackpine, my former guide,
did not agree to stay with us. He was a converted Indian and
a reliable man, and it was he who brought me here. But then he held
to return home. My prayers, nor my monetary offers, have
could bend it. I would give a month of my salary, Isabelle, to
give you the pleasure of seeing him drive a sleigh. This Mac Cready does not
inspires me with only half confidence. He's a funny guy, the agent told me
of the Company, who got it for me, but he knows like a card of
geography the wooded region where we must travel. Dogs don't like
not change driver and shun him. Kazan especially, I am
some won't cling to him for a penny.

Kazan, his ears alert, listened to the voice of Isabelle, who now
spoke in the tent.

So he neither saw nor heard MacCready slipping
carefully behind his back and, like a gunshot,
suddenly launched his appeal:

--Pedro!

Kazan started, then gathered himself, as if the strap of a
whip had slashed him.

--I caught you this time, old devil! murmured Mac Cready, all
pale in the firelight. They changed your name, huh? But I knew
although we were old acquaintances!




III

THE DUAL


Having thus spoken, MacCready sat down in silence by the fire and
remained there for quite a long time. His gaze never left
Kazan. Then, when it was certain that Thorpe and his wife had
definitively closed in their tent, to spend the night there, he reached the
his own in turn, and entered it.

He took a bottle of whiskey and drank from it for half an hour.
successive sips. After which, without letting go of the bottle, he left
outside again and sat on the edge of the sleigh, very close to the
chain to which Kazan was attached.

The effect of the whiskey was starting to kick in, and his eyes were lighting up
abnormally.

--I got you there! he repeated. But who can have changed your old one
name? Where did you get this new master? So many enigmas for me. Ho,
ho! Too bad you can't speak...

Thorpe and his young wife were not yet asleep, for MacCready
heard the voice of one, to which a burst of laughter responded
of Isabelle.

MacCready started violently. His face turned red and he started
standing on his feet. He put his bottle in his jacket pocket
and, going around the fire, he went, with velvet steps, towards the shadow of a
tree which was near Thorpe's tent. Hidden there, for a long time he
strained his ears, motionless as a statue.

Only at midnight did he return to his own tent, haggard and with a face
upset. White women are rare in the North Land and a
irrefragable desire, close to madness, rose, growing and
terrible, in this impure soul.

In the warmth of the fire, Kazan's eyes slowly closed. He
dozed, restless, and a thousand dreams danced in his brain. He him
sometimes seemed like it was fighting, snapping its jaws.
Other times, he pulled, at the end of his chain, a sled which
came up, or Mac Cready, or his young mistress. Or even,
she sang, before him and before her master, with the marvelous
softness of his voice. And, while sleeping, Kazan's body trembled and
contracted with shivers. Then the picture changed once again,
Kazan saw himself running at the head of a splendid team of six
dogs, belonging to the Royal Police, and which were driven by their master
formerly, a young and handsome man, who called him: “Pedro! Pedro!” On the
same sled was another man, whose hands were strangely
attached by iron rings. Shortly after, the sleigh had
halt and the old master sat down near a fire, in front of which
he himself was in bed. So, the man from earlier, whose hands
were now clear, advanced, armed with an enormous club. By
behind, he suddenly brought it down on the head of the master, who fell
uttering a loud cry.

At that moment, Kazan woke up with a start. He jumps to his feet,
his spine bristling and a hoarse growl in his throat. The home was
dead and the two tents were enveloped in dark darkness. Dawn
did not appear yet.

Through this darkness, Kazan saw Mac Cready who, already up, was
returned to listening near the second tent. Kazan knew that Mac
Cready and the man with the iron rings were one, and he had no
not forgotten either the whip and club blows he received
long received, after the murder of the former master.

Hearing the threat of the wolf dog, the guide quickly returned towards
the fire which he rekindled, while whistling while stirring the logs half
consumed. When the flame began to burst forth, he uttered a cry.
of shrill call, which woke Thorpe and Isabelle.

Thorpe, a few moments later, appeared on the threshold of his tent, followed
of the young woman. She came and sat down on the sleigh, next to
Kazan. Her loose hair flowed around her head and fell
on his back in tawny waves.

While she was petting the animal, MacCready pretended to come and search
among the packages on the sleigh and, for a moment, his hands
got lost, as if by chance, in the blond hair.

Isabelle seemed not to feel the contact. But Kazan saw the fingers
fugitives who felt the hair of his young mistress, while the
same libidinous and demented flame reappeared in Mac's eyes
Cready. Faster than a lynx, he leaped over the sled,
the entire length of its chain. The guide only had time to make a
jumps back, while Kazan, suddenly held by the chain,
was thrown aside, against Isabelle, whom he came to hit with all the
weight of his body.

Thorpe, who was looking away, turned around only to see the end of
the scene and Isabelle knocked down from the shock on the sleigh. He had no doubt
point, and the guide was careful not to contradict it, until the beast had
deliberately rushed towards the young woman. After making sure everything
first that she was not injured, he searched with his hand for her
revolver. The weapon remained inside the tent. But, to his
feet, MacCready's whip was placed on the snow. Thorpe
seized and, in his anger, rushed towards Kazan.

The dog, flattened on the ground, did not make a movement to flee or
defend. The punishment he received was terrible. But he suffered it
without a complaint, without a grunt.

Then Kazan saw the young woman, who had come to her senses, rush forward
towards the whip whose strap still swung on Thorpe's head
and, seizing him, arrest him.

--Not another shot! she cried, in an imperative and pleading voice to
that time.

She pulled her husband aside.

--Kazan, she murmured, all pale and still trembling with emotion,
didn't jump on me. But, as the guide leaned towards the content
of the sleigh,” she continued, holding Thorpe’s arm tighter,
I felt his hand brush against my back and my hair. It is only then
that Kazan jumped. He didn't want to bite. It was the man! Some
Something is happening that I don't understand. I am scared.

“Come,” replied Thorpe, “calm down a little, dear friend. Mac Cready
Did he not tell you that he knew this dog? He can, in fact, have it
possessed before us and having unjustly mistreated it, so that Kazan
has not forgotten him and holds a tenacious grudge against him. I will try to
the opportunity to clarify this point. In the meantime, promise me, I will
ask again, to be circumspect and to stay away from
the animal.

Isabelle promised. But, seeing the beautiful head of
Kazan, one of whose eyes had remained closed under the bite of the whip, and
whose mouth was dripping blood, she could not restrain a movement
of emotion, which she repressed. She did not go towards him. Half blinded,
the animal knew, however, that it was she who had stopped its
punishment. And, while looking at her and whimpering, he moved in
the snow its bushy tail.

Dawn was beginning to break and, the guide having harnessed the dogs to the
sled, we set off.

The day was long and hard. Kazan, harnessed at the head, opened the track,
an eye still closed, which burned, and the body bruised under the
lashes of the caribou whip.

But it wasn't so much the physical pain that brought him down
sadly his head and lowered the enthusiasm which was customary to him, when
he ran in front of his companions. It was his spirit above all that
was suffering. For the first time in his life he felt courageless
and broken. Mac Cready once beat him. In his hand or in that
of Thorpe, alternatively, the menacing whip cracked today
above his ears, and their implacable voices ordered him to
walk, hobbling as he was.

What devastated and hurt him was seeing, at each stop where we
was resting, his beloved mistress who stood apart from him and
from his channel. It was the same when, in the evening, the
camp. She sat down out of his reach, and without speaking to him.

She looked at him with hard eyes that upset him and he
asked if she wasn't going to beat him too. He hides in
snow, with his back turned to the cheerful fire, where the shadow was most
black. This meant that his poor dog's heart was all
pain. And no one except _her_ guessed it. The young woman
neither called him nor went to him. But she kept watching him
and to observe Mac Cready, whom Kazan was similarly spying on.

When dinner was over, the two tents were pitched and, as
the day before, Thorpe and Isabelle locked themselves in theirs. MacCready
remained outside.

The snow was starting to fall. Sitting by the fire, Mac Cready, that Kazan
did not stop watching with a constantly alert curiosity,
had taken out his bottle of whiskey and drank from it frequently. Flames
made his face glow red, where his white teeth gleamed. HAS
several times he got up and placed his ear against the
tent where Thorpe and the young woman rested. Everything was silent there and
he could only hear Thorpe's snoring.

The guide raised his face to the sky. The snow fell so thick that
his eyes immediately filled with white flakes. He wiped them and left
went to examine the trail traced, a few hours earlier, by the little
caravan. She was already almost completely covered. One hour
again, and nothing could tell anyone that someone was
passed there. Even the fire, if allowed to die, would be covered before
The morning.

Mac Cready, without returning to his tent, drank several more shots. Of the
inarticulate words, joyful words, burst from his lips. His heart
the drum beat in his chest. But even more beat that of
Kazan, when he saw the guide grab a large club, which he pressed
standing against a tree.

The guide then took one of the lanterns from the sleigh and lit it.
Then, holding it in his hand, he went towards Thorpe's tent.

--Ho! Thorpe... Thorpe! he called in a low voice.

But Thorpe continued to snore.

Mac Cready opened the tent door slightly and called a little more
strong:

--Thorpe!

No response yet. Nothing moved.

Then the guide, passing his hand under the canvas, untied the cords which
internally fastened the door and lifted it completely.
Directing the ray of his lantern towards the sleeping couple, he illuminated the
golden hair of Isabelle, who had nestled her head against the shoulder of
her husband. A grin on his mouth, his eyes burning like coals
ardent, he stared fixedly.

Thorpe, in the meantime, woke up. Mac Cready let it fall
quickly opened the door, and shook it from outside, as a sign of appeal.

--Ho, Thorpe... Thorpe! he called again.

This time Thorpe replied:

--Hello! Mac Cready... Is that you?

He replied, still in a low voice:

--Yes. Can you come over for a minute? It's happening in the woods somewhere
something abnormal. No need to wake your wife...

He stood back and waited.

Thorpe appeared. MacCready pointed to the dark line of fir trees.

--I could swear, he said, that someone in there is lurking around us.
Earlier, while going to get some branches for our fire, I
saw a silhouette of a man. Such a night is propitious for thieves
of dogs. You, take the lantern... If I'm not crazy, we
I am sure we will find footsteps in the snow.

He gave the lantern to Thorpe and took the big club.

A growl, which he repressed, rose in Kazan's throat. He would have wanted
issue a warning to his master and jump towards him, at the end of his
chain. But he thought that if he did so, he would be beaten. He
silenced and watched the two men disappear from company. Then he
waited and listened.

Soon footsteps made the snow crunch. Mac Cready returned alone, Kazan
was not surprised, because he knew what, at night, in this hand,
the gourd in meant.

The guide's face had now taken on a frightening aspect. It was not
no longer a man, but a ferocious beast. He had lost his hat
fur and was bareheaded under the snow. It emitted, in jerks, a
vile laughter, which he immediately restrained.

Kazan lurked deeper into the shadows and this was what he saw. Mac
Cready, who held the club in one hand and the lantern in the other,
headed towards the master's tent. There, abandoning his club, he
lifted the door. After looking inside and seeing
that the young woman was still sleeping, he entered, supple and silent
like a cat. The door fell on him.

Once in the square, the guide hung the lantern on a nail on the stake
central, which supported the tent. Isabelle continued to rest
peacefully and Mac Cready stared at her, stared...

Outside, in the thick of the night, Kazan tried to fathom the meaning
unusual things that happened one after the other. His master, first of all, had
disappeared. Then, what could the guide do in this
tent, where everything it contained belonged to the master? Through a narrow
moving aside the canvas, he saw the enormous shadow of MacCready.

By chance, the wolfdog had stood on its paws, stopped, the
back tense and bristling. Suddenly, a loud cry rang out. In terror
fierce at this cry, he immediately recognized her voice, and he
jumped towards the tent. The chain stopped her and the necklace she was on
attached choked the scream from his throat.

He knew now, from the shaking of the tent and the clashes that
received the painting, that his mistress was struggling with the man and
that they were both struggling. The screams followed one another. She called
Thorpe and also shouted:

--Kazan! Kazan!

He jumped again and was thrown onto his back. A second time, a
third, he renewed his efforts. The sinew collar cut him
neck and entered his flesh like a knife. He was forced to
stop, to catch your breath.

Inside the tent, the struggle continued, terrible. From time to time
another, through the small slit in the canvas, Kazan saw two shadows which
sometimes struggled on their feet, and sometimes rolled and twisted on the
ground. In a last and most violent effort, the animal rushed with all its might
weight, with a fierce howl. Around his neck there was a
imperceptible cracking. It was the collar that gave way.

In a flash, Kazan was in the tent, at Mac's throat
Cready. The first grip of its powerful jaw was death. He
there was a muffled death rattle, followed by an awful sob, and MacCready
collapsed onto his knees, then onto his back. And deeper
again, drunk with the hot blood that flowed from his mouth, Kazan thrust
his fangs in the throat of his enemy.

He heard his mistress calling him. Pulling on her bushy neck, she
tried to make him let go. He was slow to obey, then
decided to part his jaws. Then Isabelle leaned towards the man,
looked at him, then covered his face with his hands.

She then moved back to her bed and collapsed on the
blankets. She also no longer moved. Worried, Kazan went to her.
He smelled his face and his hands, which were cold, and
tenderly his muzzle. She still didn't move. His eyes were
closed.

Without losing sight of Mac Cready's corpse and ready to repeat, if
it was necessary, Kazan sat up against the bed. Why,
he asked, was the young woman motionless like that? She became agitated
finally her eyes opened and her hand touched him.

Outside, footsteps crunched the snow. The wolfdog ran towards the
tent door. By the light of the fire he saw Thorpe advancing into
at night, with slow steps, leaning on a stick, staggering with weakness and the
face red with blood.

At the sight of the stick, Kazan shuddered with fear. What was going to say
the master, realizing that he had hurt MacCready? Without
No doubt he would be beaten again, and terribly.

Quickly, he slipped into the shadows and reached the fir trees. There he
returned and a dull moan, of pain and love, rose and died
in his throat. Since what he had done, always, from now on, he
would be beaten, beaten without respite. And, to punish him, even _she_
would beat. If he stayed here any longer, they would run after him
and, after catching up with him, would beat him.

Far from the fire, the wolfdog turned his head towards the depths of the
forest. In this darkness there was neither club, nor stick, nor
stinging strips. We would never find him there.

He seemed to hesitate for a moment again. Then, silently, as would have done
one of those wild creatures to which he was returning, he
plunged into the dark.




IV

FREE FROM SERVANCE


The wind moaned plaintively on the tops of the fir trees and, for a
Part of the night, Kazan wandered in the mystery of the forest.

Then he approached the camp again and, without going beyond
the protection of the trees, he lay down, shivering, in the snow
thick, staring at the tent where the terrible thing had happened.

He smelled death in the air, the death that had come through him. And the
three quarters of the dog inside him were whining
painfully, while the quarter wolf still bristled, the
hostile look, fangs bared and ready to bite.

Three times he saw Thorpe, staggering and with his forehead bandaged, come out of
the tent, and who shouted loudly:

--Kazan! Kazan! Kazan!

Isabelle was, all three times, at Thorpe's side. In the light of
home, Kazan could see it, as it was when he had
jumped towards her to defend her and killed the man. She was pale
still, pale as snow, from the danger incurred, and the terror had not subsided
not completely running away from his blue eyes. She also called:

--Kazan! Kazan! Kazan!

Then the dog seemed to prevail over the wolf and, with a shudder
happy, he crawled a little forward, almost determined to receive the
blows which, he thought, awaited him. But the fear of the club
ended up being the strongest and he retreated again into the night.
Discouraged, Thorpe and Isabelle returned to the tent, and the silence
fell back.

No longer seeing anyone, and as the flickering flame of the hearth
was dying, Kazan decided to move towards the sleigh and to the logs
consumed. A little further, covered with a blanket, lay the body
of the man he had killed. Thorpe had dragged him there, under the shelter of a
bush.

To warm himself, Kazan lay down near the red embers, his nose
on its feet, eyes spying towards the tent, and ready to flee into the
forest at the first suspicious movement. But, despite his efforts to
stay awake, he could not resist the beneficial warmth which
hot embers and ashes radiated towards him. Several
several times, his eyes closed. He opened them again, then closed them, and he
fell asleep heavily.

After dreaming, sometimes of the softness of Isabelle's hand, and sometimes
of battle where its jaws slammed like steel castanets,
he woke up with a start, just in time to see the web of
the tent. He fled towards the fir trees.

The day was dawning. Thorpe appeared, holding in one of his hands the
hand of his young wife and had a rifle in the other. They all looked
two towards the body that was under the blanket. Then Thorpe, rejecting
his head back, called:

--Ho, o, o, o..., Kazan! Kazan! Kazan!

Through the low branches of the fir trees, Kazan looked towards Thorpe and
towards the gun, and began to tremble in all his limbs. The master,
no doubt, was trying to coax him into the thing
who killed.

--Kazan! Kazan! Ka, a, a, a, zan! cried Thorpe again.

Kazan knew that distance is nothing to the cold thing and
Murder held by Thorpe. Staying any longer was perilous.
One last time, he turned towards Isabelle his eyes filled with a
ineffable desire for affection and love. The decisive hour of farewell
had rung. A desire came over him to proclaim his despair and his loneliness
in the gray sky. But, to avoid being discovered, he kept silent.

--He left! said Isabelle with emotion.

--Yes, gone! replied Thorpe, in an unsteady voice. I was unfair
towards him. He knew and I didn't. How much I regret having it
foolishly beaten, as I did! It's too late now... He
is gone and will never come back.

--Yes Yes! He will come back... the young woman replied quickly. He ... not
will not abandon me. He loved me. He was wild and terrible. And he knows
how much I loved him. He will come back! Listen...

From the depths of the forest, a long howl came to the camp
plaintive.

It was Kazan's farewell.




V

KAZAN MEETS GRAY WOLF


Sitting on his behind, Kazan, after uttering his distant cry, began to
to sniff in the air the freedom that was now his. Around
from him vanished, with the dawn, the depths of night of the forest.

Since the day when all over there, on the banks of the Mackenzie[7], he had
been, by merchants who traded in these areas, purchased from
Indians and, for the first time, harnessed to the harnesses of a sled, he
had often, in ardent desire, thought of this freedom towards which
the wolf blood that was in him repelled him. He never had
completely daring. Now that it was done, it was all
disoriented.

  [7] The Mackenzie River has its source in the Rocky Mountains,
    crosses Canada towards the west and will flow into the Glacial Sea
    of the North, after having rubbed shoulders with the Great Bear and
    the Slave.

The sun was completely up when he arrived at the edge of a marsh,
calm and frozen, which occupied a depression between two chains of
mountain. The fir and the cedar grew thickly on its edges, so thickly
that the snow had barely crossed their branches and that the light shone there
subdued to the point of being nothing more than twilight.

The day had not succeeded in dissipating the unease Kazan was feeling.
He was free from men and nothing was around him anymore that
recalled their hated presence. But the society of other dogs, the fire,
the ready-made food and even the customary sleigh, all these
things that had always been an integral part of his life, he
were missing. He felt alone.

These regrets were those of the dog. But the wolf reacted. He said to
dog that, somewhere, in this silent world, there were brothers
and that, to make them come running, he had to sit on his
behind and howl his loneliness in the distance. Many times Kazan felt
the call trembling in his chest and in his throat, without succeeding
completely to exhale it.

The food came to him faster than the voice. Towards the middle of
One day, he cornered a large white rabbit against a tree stump and killed it.
Warm flesh and red blood were better than frozen fish
and that the customary tallow, and the succulence of this new meal revived
Her confidence.

During the afternoon he chased several other rabbits and
killed two more. Until now he had ignored the pleasure of hunting
and that of killing game as much as he pleased, although he had not
did not eat everything he had killed.

Then he found that rabbits died too easily. There was no
no fight. The rabbits were very fresh and very tender when
was hungry, but the joy of victory was minimal. He therefore set out
quest for larger game.

He walked openly and without thinking of concealing himself, with his head held high,
back bristling. Its bushy tail swung freely, like that
of a wolf. His whole body quivered with the energy of life and desire
of action. Instinctively, he headed northwest.
It was the call of the distant days that he had once lived on the
banks of the Mackenzie, a thousand miles away[8].

  [8] The English mile is worth 1,600 meters.

He encountered various trails and sniffed the odors left by
elk and caribou hooves. He noted the footprints,
wadded with fur, of a lynx. He also tracked a fox and thus arrived
to a clearing surrounded by tall fir trees, where the snow was beaten and
reddened with blood. On the ground lay the head of an owl, its feathers, its
wings and its insides. And he understood that he was not the only one
hunter in the region.

Towards evening, he came across other footprints which looked very similar
to his own. They were all fresh and their recent scent fit
that he groaned, getting back on his behind and trying to
new vocalizations, to the cry of the wolf.

As the shadows of the night grew in the forest, he
felt his loneliness more and the need became more compelling
to call his wild brothers to him. He had been traveling all day,
but did not feel tired. The night was clear and the sky filled
of stars. The moon was rising.

He settled down on the snow again, his nose pointed towards the summit of the
fir trees, and the wolf was suddenly born in him, in a long and lugubrious
howl, which ran far away, for miles, through the night
silence.

When he had finished his cry, he sat and listened, proud of
the strange and new modulation that his throat had achieved. But
no voice answered his. He had, without realizing it
account, howled against the wind, which drove back its cry behind it. Alone
a male elk was awakened, which fled very close to him,
making the bushes crack, and whose great horns came
beat, like drumsticks, with a dry noise, the antlers
trees.

Twice more Kazan let out his howl, to be sure of
hold his new cry. Then he set off again.

He arrived at the foot of a steep and rugged ridge, which he climbed
describing a detour, and of which he thus reached the summit.

Once there, it seemed to him that the stars and the moon were closer
of him, and he marveled. Then, having looked at the
behind the ridge, he discovered at his feet a vast plain, with a
frozen lake, which sparkled in the moonlight. From this lake came a river
white with frost, too, and which then disappeared among
trees appearing, as far as he could judge, less bushy and less
denser than those with which the marsh was bordered.

And lo and behold, in the distance, in the plain, a cry resounded, similar to the one
he himself had uttered the cry of the wolf! Its jaws snapped, its fangs
shone and he was ready to respond immediately. But the instinct of distrust
of the Wild, which was innate in him and commanded him to be careful,
that he was silent[9].

  [9] The _Wild_, or the _Wilderness_, is a generic term,
    untranslatable, which, like the Causse, the Brousse, the Pampa, the
    Steppe, Jungle, Maquis, designates a particular region and
    all the typical elements that constitute it. The _Wild_, which
    occupies a large part of the American Northland, extending to the
    Arctic Circle. It is no longer the normally habitable earth, and this
    is not yet the dead region of the Pole. The forests, alternating with
    meadows, are numerous. During most of the year,
    winter rages and snow evenly covers the earth. A brief
    was quickly made to grow rapid and luxuriant vegetation. THE
    the ground is sometimes flat, like the bare expanses of the _Barrens_,
    sometimes mountainous and rugged.

He continued to listen, quivering and overcome with excitement.
wild, which he could barely control. The cry soon came closer,
close, very close, and others joined in, a kind of yelping
sharp and rapid, to which still others responded in the distance. THE
wolves gathered for the night's hunt.

Kazan, sitting on his behind and trembling, still did not move.
It wasn't that he was afraid. But the mountain crest where it stands
found seemed to cut the universe in two.

Down there, beneath him, was a new world, free of men
and slavery. Behind, something hovered in the air, which
attracted him through space, flooded with lunar light, which he fixed
eyes. A woman who had been good and gentle to him, and of whom he
thought he still heard the voice, felt the caressing hand, called him
through the forests. He thought he heard her clear laughter, which made him so
happy, seeing his young face.

Which of the two calls should he respond to? To the one who called him
low, in the plain? To the other, who brought him back to men
wicked, towards their clubs and towards the stinging thongs of their
whips? For a long time he remained hesitant, without moving, turning his head,
sometimes on one side and sometimes on the other.

Then he went down to the plain.

All night long, he remained near the troop of wolves, but
without risking getting too close. And he did well. He had
preserved, impregnated in its coat, the special smell of the harnesses worn
by him and that of the men with whom he had lived. The wolves would have
immediately torn to pieces. The self-preservation instinct of creatures of the
Wild, who had come to him, like a faint whisper, through
successive generations of wolf ancestors, had taught him that he must
act thus, as he taught him, in order to imbue himself with another
smell, to roll in the snow, where she had been most densely
trampled by his wild brothers.

The horde had, at the edge of the lake, killed a caribou and almost celebrated
until dawn. Kazan smelled the wind in front of him. He him
brought the smell of blood and warm flesh, which tickled him
pleasantly nostrils. The keenness of his hearing perceived the cracking
bones in the jaws. But the instinct to save him was more
strong as temptation.

In broad daylight, when the troop had scattered to the right and
left on the plain, Kazan came to the place of the feast. He ... not
found more than the snow reddened with blood, covered with entrails and
shredded pieces of leathery skin. Scraps of flesh, abandoned
by the sated horde, were still adjacent to the large bones. Kazan buried
his muzzle in this debris and rolled again on the ground, in order to
saturate with all these scents.

The evening found him again in the same place and, when the moon and the
stars appeared, without trembling this time, he renewed his call.

It was a second horde which arrived, coming from the south, and which led
train another caribou, which she drove towards the frozen lake. The night
was almost as bright as day and Kazan saw the hunted beast,
a female, coming out of a fir wood, the wolves on her heels.
There were about a dozen of them, divided into two groups
who advanced in a horseshoe formation, each group led by
a leader and gradually tightening the common vise.

Letting out a sharp yelp, Kazan, when the caribou passed by
close to him, darted like a bolt and immediately took chase,
stuck to the beast's hooves. After two hundred yards[10], the caribou
made a turn to the right and came to throw himself towards one of the leaders of the
pack, which blocked its path with its open jaws. The caribou
stopped, for a flash, and Kazan took the opportunity to jump at him.
throat.

  [10] The yard is worth 0 m. 91 (914 mm.).

While the remaining wolves ran howling, the vanquished beast
collapsed on the ground, half crushing Kazan under his body, whose
The fangs only sank further into the jugular vein. Despite
the weight that weighed on him and suffocated him, he did not let go of his
influence. It was his first big prey. His blood burned, hotter
nothing but fire, and he growled through clenched teeth.

Not until the last spasm of agony had left the caribou,
Kazan did not free himself from the heavy chest. During the day he had
killed and ate a rabbit, and was not hungry. So he stepped back and,
sitting in the snow, quietly watched the horde tear the
corpse.

As the feast drew to a close, he ventured among his new
brothers, poked his nose between two of them, and received, in
as a welcome, a bite.

As he withdrew a little, wondering if it was suitable
to insist, a big wolf, breaking away from the pack, suddenly jumped
towards him, straight to his throat. He barely had time to parry
the attack, covering itself with its shoulder, and the two beasts went
rolling and rolling again in the snow.

Kazan and the she-wolf had barely gotten back on their feet when
the excitement of this sudden battle diverted the attention of the
other wolves. Abandoning the remains of the caribou, they formed a circle,
baring their fangs, bristling like brushes their gray backs
yellowish, while one of the two leaders advanced towards Kazan, to
challenge. As soon as the two beasts were grappling, the fatal ring was
closed completely around the combatants.

This kind of closed-field tournament was not new for Kazan.
This was the ordinary mode of combat of sled dogs, when they
resolved their quarrels. If the man did not intervene with a whip or
a club, the battle infallibly ended with the death of a
of the two champions. Sometimes they both lost their lives.

There was no need to count on human intervention here. Nothing but
the cordon of devils with sharp fangs, who waited impatiently
the result of the fight, ready to pounce on the first of two
opponents who would fall on their back or side, and to put them
in pieces. Kazan was a stranger among the horde. He had nothing to
However, fear an attack from the ranks of spectators. There
The law of combat was, for each adversary, equal justice.

Kazan therefore only had to worry about the great gray chief who had
provoked. Shoulder to shoulder, they turned in a circle, watching for one
and the other the moment of a favorable body taking. Where, some
moments before, were snapping jaws and crunching bones and bones.
flesh, silence had fallen.

Degenerate dogs of the South Earth, with weak legs and
tender throat, would have in such an event growled their threats, in
baring his teeth. Kazan and the great wolf, on the contrary, remained
calm, at least in appearance. Their ears, pointed forward,
did not retreat fearfully, nor the plume of their tails
bushy, which fluttered in the wind, did not fall between their paws.

Suddenly, the wolf made its first attack which Kazan avoided.
very little. The wolf's jaws closed together,
with a sound of steel, and Kazan took the opportunity to launch his response. THE
The knives of his teeth scarred the side of his adversary. After
what, the two animals began to go around in circles again, leaning against each other
the other.

Their eyes grew more ardent, their lips puckered and
rolled up. It was Kazan's turn to throw his attack and try
from the death grip to the throat. Very narrowly, he too, missed his
blow and the gyratory movement began again.

Blood flowed copiously from the wounded side of the great wolf and turned red
the snow. Suddenly (it was an old trick he had learned in
his youth), Kazan let himself fall to the ground, his eyes half-closed. THE
The big wolf, astonished, also stopped and circled around him. Kazan,
who observed him, took advantage of the fact that the enemy throat was within his reach
to try to seize it again. But, this time again, there was a
useless snapping of jaws. With the agility of a cat, the wolf had
already turned on itself and turned around.

Then the real battle began. The two beasts leapt against each other
the other and met, in their momentum, chest to chest.
Kazan, whose goal was always a hold on the throat, tried it
again. He missed her again, by the thickness of a hair, and while
while his head was down, the wolf grabbed him by the neck.

The attack was terrible and Kazan felt intense terror.
The pain he felt was sharp too. However, he managed to
pull forward the head of the great wolf, which he grasped, at the joint of the
body, one of the two front legs.

The leg bone cracked beneath its jaw, firmly embedded in the
hair and flesh, and the circle of wolves became more attentive. THE
The denouement was approaching. Which of the two fighters would give up first?
its grip and would roll on the snow, to be devoured?

It was Kazan who, uniting all his forces in a desperate effort,
managed to stand up under the grip of his adversary and, with one
violent movement, to be torn from its jaws.

Then, as soon as he was free, he rushed against the great wolf who,
broken leg, was in an unstable balance. In a full bunch
Appropriately, he hit him full in the side. The animal lost its footing, rolled
his back, and the horde immediately pounced on him, hastening to feast on
its former leader whose power and strength were no more.

Letting the howling pack, with bloody lips, devour the vanquished,
Kazan withdrew to one side, panting and in very bad shape himself. Her
Weakness was extreme and his brain was somewhat cloudy.

He felt the need to lie down on the snow. But the atavistic and
certain instinct of self-preservation warned him not to abandon himself to
this desire.

As he was there, he saw a young gray she-wolf who, lithe and slender,
was advancing. She began by lying down in front of him, with an air of
submission, then quickly got up and began to sniff his wounds.

It was a pretty beast, well decoupled. But Kazan did not lend him
attention. He was too busy watching the old one disappear
chief, whose bones cracked, like those of the caribou had cracked, and
whose flesh and skin were falling into shreds.

A pride rose within him, which told him that he was now worthy
new brothers he had given himself. From now on, when he launches
its howl to the moon and the stars, among the great White Desert, the
dark hunters with fast legs would no longer miss him
respond and run!

As his strength had returned a little, after one last glance
towards the horde seated, he trotted back to the nearest
fir trees. Before sinking into it, he turned around and noticed that Louve
Grise, that's what we'll call him from now on, followed him.

She was only a few yards from him and still moving forward, with a
little shyness. Something that was neither the smell of blood nor the
perfume of balsam trees[11], nor the resinous aroma of pines, floated in
the air, under the clear stars, in the soothing calm of the night. And
this something emanated from Gray Wolf.

  [11] This name is given to trees which secrete “balm”, a type of
    particularly odoriferous resin.

He looked into her eyes and saw that those eyes seemed
question him. She was barely a teenager. On his head and on his back
His smooth, silky hair shone under the moon. She read, in the
Kazan's sparkling look, his astonishment, and groaned softly.

Kazan took a few steps forward. He rested his head on Louve's back.
Gray and felt that at his touch she was trembling. The mystery of the night
and stars were upon them. Now she had turned her face
towards Kazan's wounds and licked them, to soothe the pain. He
thought of other caresses which had also been beneficial to him.

Soon, his back proudly bristling, his head held high, he was sinking, side by side
coast with Louve Grise, further under the fir trees.




VI

THE SLED ATTACK


Both, that night, found peaceful shelter under the balsam trees
and the thick fir trees. The ground, covered with fine needles like snow
had not covered them, offered them to spread out its soft
padding. Gray Wolf curled her warm body against Kazan's,
continuing to lick his wounds.

At daybreak, a thick, velvety snow fell, veiling the
landscape around them, like a curtain. The temperature had cooled
and nothing could be heard, in the immense silence, except the fluttering of
white flakes. All day long, Kazan and Gray Wolf ran from
company. From time to time Kazan turned his head towards the ridge he
had passed two days before and Gray Wolf could not explain the
foreign sounds rolling down his throat.

Towards evening, the couple having encountered no game, Kazan brought back
Gray Wolf at the edge of the lake, towards the debris of the day's double feast
precedent which could still survive.

Although Gray Wolf had not made direct acquaintance with the
poisoned meats, with the bait cleverly placed by man on
the foliage of invisible and treacherous pits, and on traps
of steel, the eternal instinct of the Wilderness was in his veins and he
taught that there was danger in touching dead flesh when it
had become cold.

Kazan, on the contrary, was better informed than she. He had rubbed shoulders with,
with his masters, many old harmless carcasses, at the same time
that he had seen them place their traps and roll small capsules
of strychnine in the guts of dead animals, which served as bait.
Once, he even accidentally let his paw get caught by a
trap door and he had felt its stinging embrace. But he knew that
no man had come here since the day before and he invited Gray Wolf,
remained on the edge of the lake, venturing with him among the large blocks
of ice piled up[12].

  [12] These blocks, the _hummocks_, come from the pressure of the ice
    on itself, when the water in the lakes freezes.

She decided to accompany him. But she was in such a state
agitation that she fell heavily on her behind, while
Kazan dug with his paws in the fresh snow in order to
extract the remains of the caribou, which had been well preserved there. She
stubbornly refused to touch it and Kazan, ultimately, not succeeding
to decide, he too became afraid and acted like her.

They said many other things to each other during the days and nights that
followed. During the third night, Kazan, launching his appeal,
gathered the same horde around him and took charge of the hunt.
Three times it was the same during the month, before the moon
decreasing would have left the heavens. And, each time, there was prey.
Then he hunted in the only company of Gray Wolf, who was for
him an increasingly gentle society, and they lived on white rabbits.

Whatever the attractiveness of his companion, it often happened that Kazan
went up with her to the ridge which dominated the vast plain, of which he
hadn't gone away, and he was trying to explain to her everything he had
left behind. This call from the past was so strong, sometimes, that it
had great difficulty resisting the desire to return to the tent of
Thorpe, leading Gray Wolf after him.

Then an unexpected event happened. As the couple wandered one day
at the foot of a small mountain range, Kazan saw, on the slope which
towered over him, something that abruptly stopped the beating of his
heart. A man, with a sled and his team of dogs, was coming down
in their world.

The wind, which was contrary, had not warned him, nor Gray Wolf,
and Kazan suddenly saw an object which, under the sun, sparkled in
man's hands. He was not ignorant of what this was, that is to say
the object that spits fire and thunder, and that kills.

He immediately gave the alarm to Gray Wolf and they sped off together,
all paws. But a detonation rang out and, while Kazan
furiously growled his hatred at the object that killed and at men, a
whistling sound passed over his head.

Then there was a second detonation and Gray Wolf, this time,
uttering a yelp of pain, went rolling in the snow.

She got up immediately and, escorted by Kazan, resumed her course towards
the shelter of a small wood. There she stopped to lick his shoulder
injured, while Kazan continued to observe.

The man with the gun had followed their trail. He stopped at the place where Louve
Grise had fallen and examined the snow. Then he continued to move forward.

Kazan, with his muzzle, helped Gray Wolf to get back on her paws. They
quickly slipped away and found a safer refuge in the thick
vegetation that lined the shores of the lake. All day long, while
Gray Wolf lay on the snow, Kazan remained on the lookout,
stealthily going back to observe, and smelling the wind.
But the man had given up.

The next day, Gray Wolf was limping. By carefully exploring all
folds of the land, the couple arrived at the remains of an old camp.
Kazan's teeth bared and he growled his hatred of the man who,
when leaving, had left its scent. The desire grew within him to
avenge Gray Wolf's injury. His own wounds, poorly closed,
increased his irritation. With his muzzle at ground level, he tried to
discover, under the new snow, the direction that the enemy had
socket. He forgot the gun.

For three days, Kazan and Gray Wolf, the latter despite her
limping which continued, they ran at random, straight ahead of them, and
traveled quite a considerable distance. On the night of the third day,
which was the one where the first quarter of the new moon appeared,
Kazan encountered a fresh trail.

So fresh was it that he stopped short, as suddenly as if a
bullet had hit him in his path. Every muscle in his body began to
shuddered and his hairs stood on end.

It was the man's trail. There were and the prints of the sled,
and those of the paws of dogs, and those also of snowshoes
the man, who was going on foot.

Then Kazan raised his muzzle to the stars and from his throat gushed,
rolling away, among the Wilderness, the wild and fierce call to the
horde of his brothers. Never again this call, which he repeated to several
times, had never been so hellish and sinister.

He was heard and a first cry answered him, then a second, then a
third, then others. So much so that Gray Wolf sat down at her
turned on his behind and mixed his voice with Kazan's.

And there, on the white snow, the man, livid and haggard, stopped
with his dogs, to listen, while a faint voice coming from
sled said:

--Father, it's the wolves. Are they chasing us?

The man was silent. He was no longer young. The moon shone on her
long white beard and made his tall stature more ghostly. On
the sleigh was a young woman, who raised her head, from a bear's skin
where she leaned, like on a pillow. The eyes of the young woman
were illuminated by the lunar light which they reflected. She was pale,
her too. Her hair fell over her shoulders in a braid.
thick and silky, and against his chest there was something
which she pressed.

The man, after a few moments, replied:

--They follow a trail, probably that of a reindeer or a caribou.

He stared at the slide of his rifle and added:

--Don't worry, Jeannie! We will camp at the next bouquet
of trees where we can find enough dry wood to establish our
fire. Come on, dogs! Let’s get back on track, friends! Ah! ah! ah!
ah! Kouche! Kouche!

And the whip cracked above the team. From the package that the young woman
held tight to his chest, came out a little plaintive cry, to which
the scattered voices of the wolves seemed to respond.

Kazan, however, thought that he would soon be able to take his
revenge on one of these men who had put him in danger for so long
serfdom. He began to trot slowly again, side by side with Gray Wolf,
stopping only, every three or four hundred yards, to
renew his call.

A gray and leaping form, which came from behind, did not take long
to join the couple. Another followed. Then two others, to the right and to
LEFT. And Kazan's cry of appeal followed, between the gathered wolves,
a varied chatter of hoarse voices. The little troop gradually increased
little and, as it became more numerous, its appearance became
faster. Four, six, seven, ten, fourteen...

The band thus constituted, which reached the open space where
found the sleigh and which was swept by the wind, was composed of animals
adults and strong. Gray Wolf was the youngest among these bold
hunters and his muzzle did not leave Kazan's shoulder.

The horde had fallen silent. All we could hear was the panting of
breathing and the soft beating of the paws on the snow. Wolves
went very quickly, in close ranks. And always Kazan
preceded, the length of a leap, with Gray Wolf at his shoulder.

For the first time in his life, he no longer feared man or
club and whip, nor the mysterious thing that spit fire in the distance
And the dead. And, if he ran so fast, it was in order to surprise more
sooner his old enemy, to give him battle sooner. All the
compression of his fury, during four years of slavery and abuse of
strength, relaxed through his veins, in currents of fire. And when
finally he had seen in the distance, on the snowy plain, small dots
black people who were moving, the cry that came from his throat had been so
strange that Gray Wolf hadn't understood what it meant.

At full speed, the wolves rushed, and on the little black dots, and
on the thin wooden frame of the sled, which stood out against the
snow. But, before they had reached their goal, the sleigh
had stopped and suddenly appeared these tongues of fire
intermittent, so feared in Kazan, which burst into the air in
whistling, these stinging bees of death.

In his murderous madness, however, Kazan did not allow himself to be frightened and,
neither he nor his brothers slowed down their momentum.

The bees of death, one, two, three, four, five, were passing,
however, impetuous as lightning. Already three wolves had rolled
on the snow and the others moved away from right and left. There
second of the bullets of the man who fired, had, a first time, in
the black shadow, brushed against Kazan from head to tail, shaving the hair on his
passage. At the last shot he felt the burning thing that
ran along his shoulder and then stung into his flesh. But he continued to
move forward anyway, alone with Gray Wolf, who faithfully followed him.

The sled dogs had been released from their harnesses and, before he
could reach the man in front of him, Kazan came up against their
fighting mass. He fought like a demon, and there was within him the
force of two wolves, while he madly played with his fangs.

Two of his brothers came to join him and rushed into the fray.
And twice more he heard the terrible gun ring, twice
again he saw the two animals fall, their backs broken. The man had
took his rifle by the barrel and held it like a club. To the
the much-hated cudgel, Kazan redoubled his efforts. This is what he wanted
reach!

Freeing himself from the pack of dogs, he suddenly jumped up to
sled. Only then did he realize that there was another being there
human, wrapped in furs. His teeth sank into the
thick hair.

And he heard a voice, a voice whose sweet timbre made him
flinch. It was _her_ voice, her voice! Every muscle of his
his body froze and he seemed petrified.

At the same time the bearskin parted and, in the lunar glow, under
the diffuse light of the stars, he discovered who it was who was speaking.

He was wrong. It wasn't _her_. But the voice was all
similar to his. But, in the white woman's face that he had
there, before his eyes, burning like embers, there was as if
a mysterious image of the one he had learned to love so much. And,
against his chest, this trembling form pressed another being, more
little one, which was emitting a singular cry, a quivering moan.

Quicker than human reasoning, instinct had played a role in
Kazan. In less than a second, turning around, he slammed his
teeth towards Gray Wolf, so fiercely that she backed away, with a
yelp of fright. Then, while the man, half thrown back,
wavered with his rifle, Kazan, passing under his nose, rushed against
what remained of the pack of wolves. Even more savagely than he
had fought against the dogs earlier, he was now fighting,
next to them, its fangs slashing and cutting like knives. And
the staggering man, covered in blood, marveled at what
happened. Gray Wolf herself had sided with Kazan,
good companion, and, although without understanding, faced the howls
enemies, kicking as best they can.

When the battle was over, Kazan and Gray Wolf were alone on
the snowy plain. The sleigh had disappeared.

Kazan and Gray Wolf were injured, and he more seriously than her. He
was all bleeding and torn. One of its paws was deeply
notched. At the edge of a wood, a fire was burning. He saw this fire and a
imperious desire seizes him to crawl towards him, to feel on his head
pass the caress of the hand of the woman he knew there, as he had
once felt the other hand. Towards this caress he would have gone, trying
to decide Gray Wolf to follow him. But, near the woman, there was
a man. He began to moan.

He felt that he was now an outcast in the world. He had
fought against his wild brothers, who will never again
would come to his call, when he uttered his howl to the sky.
This sky, the moon and the stars, and the vast snowy plains were
against him now. And towards man he didn't dare either
return.

With Gray Wolf he headed towards the woods, away from the bright fire. If
was he in bad shape that as soon as he reached him he had to lie down on
floor. The smells of the camp, however, reached him and
Gray Wolf, hugging herself cuddly against his body, tried to
calm, with his tender tongue, his bleeding wounds, while,
lifting his head, he moaned softly to the stars.




VII

KAZAN FINDS JEANNE’S CARESSE


At the edge of the small wood of cedars and firs, Pierre Radisson, the
old trapper, after setting up the tent, loaded his fire. He
bled from a dozen wounds, bites into his flesh from fangs
wolves, and it seemed to him that another was opening in his chest
old wound, the terrible gravity of which only he knew.

One after the other, he dragged the logs he had cut and
piled up on those which were already burning, while the flame rose to
through the thin twigs that still clung to it. Then he did, with
other logs, a supply of wood for the night.

From the sleigh, on which she remained, Jeanne followed the
movements of his father, his eyes still dilated with fear, and all
trembling. On her chest she still pressed her baby, and her
long black hair gleamed in the reflections of the fire. His face was so
young, so ingenuous, that one could hardly have believed that she was a mother.

When old Pierre had thrown his last armful of
wood, he turned towards Jeanne, panting, and began to laugh.

--It was a close call, _my darling_[13], he said, quite oppressed, in
his white beard, that we both remain there! There we saw the
death closer than ever, before our final hour, we
we'll see you again, I hope. Now we're out of the woods and warm,
very comfortably. At least you're not afraid anymore?

  [13] The words in italics are in French in the text.

He came and sat down near Jeanne and, gently, brushed aside the fur that
enveloped the child. Little rosy cheeks appeared. As for the eyes
of Jeanne, they glowed in the night like two stars.

--It's the baby who saved us, she whispered. The wolves had
scattered the dogs and they were already pouncing on us both, when one
of them, preceding them, reached the sleigh. I believed at first that
it was one of our dogs. But no, it was definitely a wolf! A first
time he tried to bite us. But his teeth were lost in the skin
of the bear. He rushed again and was almost at my throat, when
baby cried. Then he stopped his momentum an inch from us, and I would have sworn
that it was a dog. Almost immediately he turned and fought for
We. I saw him strike down one of his brothers who was going to devour us.

--It was indeed a dog, _my darling_, replied Pierre, stretching out his
hands towards the heat of the fire. It often happens that dogs
move away from the posts and mingle with the wolves. I noticed it
myself, at my expense. But a dog remains a dog all its life. Even
if he has been mistreated, even in the company of wolves, his nature
primitive remains. He had come to kill, but once within range of
TO DO...

--He has once again become our defender, our savior. Yes the poor beast,
she added with a sigh, “fought for us. She was even
cruelly injured. I saw her leave, dragging her paw sadly.
Father, she must be somewhere, at this time, dying.

She stood up, thin and slender, to her full height, in the light
of the home, and stretched her limbs after passing the baby to Pierre
Radisson. But she soon had to take it again, because a deep cough,
whom he tried in vain to suffocate, began to shake the old man.
The crimson that then appeared on her father's lips, Jeanne did not
doesn't live. She had been unaware that, for the six days they had been walking
in the White Desert, Pierre had secretly felt his illness worsening.
For this reason above all, he had, every day, hurriedly walked.

--To this poor beast, he said, when the fit had subsided, I
thought me too. Wounded as she appeared to be, she should not have
go very far. Watch over the baby and warm yourself by the fire, while you wait
my return. I'll try to find it.

He retraced his steps, across the open plain, to the place of
fight. On the snow lay the four dogs, not one of which had
survived. The snow was red with their blood and they were already stiff.
Pierre shuddered as he looked at them. If they had not received the
first shock of the horde, what would have become of him, of Jeanne and of
the child? He turned his head away and resumed his search, in a new
attack of cough which injected his lips with blood.

After carefully observing the snow, he recognized the trail of their
mysterious savior. Rather than a track, it was a long furrow, which
Pierre began to follow, not doubting that he would find his
end the dead beast.

He thus returned to the edge of the wood, where he found Kazan lying on the
ground, eyes and ears on the alert, so weak, although he
did not suffer much, as he could not stand on his feet. He
was paralyzed. Gray Wolf was lying next to him.

Both of them, stranded in this shelter, never stopped observing,
through the sparse branches of the fir and cedar trees, the fire that
shone and whose glow reached them. They smelled the air
night and knew that the two human beings were there.

And the same desire persisted in Kazan to go towards this fire, leading
with him Gray Wolf, and to join the woman and her caress. The same
fear also remained of the man who accompanied this woman, because
for him, man had always been synonymous with a club, a whip, a
pain and death.

Gray Wolf, for her part, pressed Kazan, pushing him gently,
run away with her, further from the fire and deeper into the woods.
Realizing that he was in no condition to follow her, she ran
nervously on all sides, thinking, without being able to decide, of fleeing
alone. The snow around them was stained with his footprints.
But always her female instinct had been the strongest and every
time, she had returned to Kazan.

She was the first to see Pierre Radisson advancing on the track. Kazan,
whom she had warned with a growl, saw the shadowy form which
came in the light of the stars. His first movement was to flee and
he tried to drag himself back.

But he only gained a few inches of ground, while at
On the contrary, the man was approaching quickly. He lives, in his hand,
sparkle the barrel of the gun. He heard the hollow cough and the
crunching of footsteps on the snow.

Gray Wolf first snuggled up against Kazan, trembling and squeaking.
teeth. Then, when Pierre was only a few feet away, the instinct to
conservation won out and she disappeared, silent, among the
fir trees.

Kazan's fangs were bared, menacing, while Pierre
continued to walk over him, then, stopping, stared at him. He made a
new effort to drag himself on his feet. But his strengths
betrayed and he fell back on the snow.

The man put down his rifle, which he leaned against a young fir tree, and
leaned over the animal, without showing the slightest fear. With a
ferocious growl, Kazan tried to catch the hand that was falling in his teeth.
tended.

To his great surprise, the man did not pick up any stick or club. At
contrary, he held out his hand again, cautiously though, and
spoke with a voice free of harshness. Kazan, however, still did
chattering his teeth and growling.

But the man persisted, still talking to him. Of the mitten whose
hand was covered, he even touched her head, then removed it quite
quickly to escape the jaws. On three different occasions,
Kazan felt the touch of the mitten; contact where there was no threat
nor pain. That done, the man turned his back on him and left.

When Pierre had gone away, Kazan uttered a plaintive cry and the hair that
had risen into a crest, all along its spine, flattened. He
looked ardently towards the light of the fire. The man had not done to him
no harm. He wished he could run after him.

Gray Wolf, who had not been far away, had returned when she had
saw that Kazan was alone again and she stood before him, the
stiff legs.

It was the first time, except during the attack on the sleigh, that she
had been so close to the man's touch. She had difficulty understanding what was happening
was passing. All his instinct warned him that man was in this world
the dangerous being among all, the one he had to fear more than
the strongest animals, more than storms, floods,
famine and cold. And yet the man who was there earlier
had done no harm to Kazan. She sniffed his back and head.
companion, where the mitten had touched him.

Then, once again, she fled into the thickness of the wood,
trotting in the darkness. Because she had seen, on the edge of the
plain, that suspicious movements were starting again.

The man returned, and with him the young woman. When she was within reach
from Kazan, he heard again the harmonious and sweet timbre, and he
felt like an exhalation of tenderness and sweetness that emanated
of her. As for the man, he was visibly on guard, but
was not threatening.

He warns the young woman:

--Jeanne, be careful!

She knelt on the snow, in front of the animal, out of reach of
his fangs.

Then she spoke to him kindly:

--Come, my little one! Come on, come on!

She held out her hand towards him.

Kazan's muscles tensed. From an inch to two inches, he
managed to crawl towards her.

In the eyes that looked at him, he found the old clarity, and
all the clement and consoling love he had once known, then
than another woman, with hair as beautiful, eyes as
brilliant, had entered his life.

--Come, she whispered, while he tried to move forward.

She also moved forward a little and, extending her hand further, placed it on him.
the head. Pierre, in turn, knelt near Jeanne. He
offered something, and Kazan smelled meat. But it was there
hand of Jeanne which, above all, occupied it. Under his caressing pressure, he
was trembling and seemed to be shivering. And, when Jeanne, having got up,
invited him to follow her, he gathered all his strength, but could not succeed in
obey.

Only then did Jeanne notice the sad state of one of her legs.
Forgetting all caution, she came close to him.

--He can't walk! _Father_, look! she cried with a
quiver in the voice. See what a terrible cut! It suits us
have to carry it.

--I had thought about it, replied Pierre Radisson, that's why I brought
this cover.

At that moment, from the darkness of the wood, arose a dull cry, a
pitiful moan.

--_My God!_ Jeannie! said Pierre, listen to this.

Kazan raised his head and a tearful whimper answered the
nostalgic complaint that resounded. It was Gray Wolf who
Called him.

Jeanne and her father wrapped Kazan in the blanket and, taking it
each by one end, took the crippled man with them to the camp.
It was a miracle that the operation was accomplished without further revolt from
the animal, and without scratches or bites.

Kazan was laid down in front of the fire and, after a few moments, it was
again the man who brought near him the lukewarm water which was used to wash the
wound of his paw, to remove the coagulated blood, then which spread on the
wound something sweet and calming and which tied everything together,
finally, with a strip of canvas.

Then again it was the man who offered him a succulent cake, made of
fat and flour, and who invited him to eat, while Jeanne
spoke, sitting in front of him, her chin in her hands. After which,
feeling completely comforted, he was no longer afraid at all.

A faint and very strange cry, which came from the bundle of furs
remained on the sled, made him raise his head, with a movement
jerky. Jeanne saw the movement, and heard the rolling grunt
in his throat. She ran near the package, spoke to it with
cuddly modulations and, taking him in her arms, spread the lynx skin
so that Kazan could see.

Kazan had never seen a child up close before. Jeanne reached towards
him the baby, so that he could look him in the face and admire what
wonderful little creature it was there. The pink face seemed to stare
the beast, the cute hands stretched out towards it, and a chatter
left for his address. Then, suddenly, there was a general commotion
small body and like a burst of laughter. Kazan, reassured, relaxed his
muscles and came to drag himself at the feet of the mother and child.

--See, _my father_! exclaimed Jeanne. He has already taken the child into
affection. Oh! the good beast! We must, without delay, choose a
name. But which one?

--Tomorrow morning we will look for this more at our leisure. It's getting late in
the night. Go back to the tent and sleep. The next day will be tough.
We don't have a dog anymore and we'll have to pull it ourselves.
the sled.

As she was about to enter under the canvas, Jeanne stopped.

"He came with the wolves," she said. Let's call him "Wolf."

She held little Jeannette on one of her arms. She extended the other
towards Kazan, repeating several times:

--Wolf! Wolf! Wolf!

Kazan didn't lose sight of her. He understood that she was talking to him and
moved slightly towards her.

Long after Jeanne had returned to the tent and lay down, the
old Pierre Radisson was still outside, keeping watch, sitting in front of the
fire, on the edge of the sleigh, with Kazan at his feet.

Suddenly, the silence was broken by the solitary howl of Gray Wolf.
Kazan raised his head and began to moan again.

"She's calling you, little one," said Pierre, who understood.

He coughed, pressed his hand to his chest, the pain seemed
rip. Then, speaking in Kazan:

--Lung eaten by the cold, you see. Won this at the beginning of winter,
all over there, towards the lake. However, I hope that I can regain
time at home, with my two Jeanne.

It is a habit that man soon acquires, in solitude and
nothingness of the Wilderness, to monologue with himself. But Kazan, with its
eyes sparkling with intelligence, was a ready interlocutor.
That’s why Peter was talking to him.

--We must, old man, bring them back at all costs, he continued,
stroking his beard. And that, only you and I, we can do.

A hollow cough shook him. He breathed with oppression, hugging himself
chest, and continued:

--The lodge is fifty miles away, in a straight line. I pray to God that we
can get there safe and sound, and that my lungs do not abandon me
not before.

He got up, staggering a little, and went towards Kazan. He attached the
beast behind the sleigh; then, after throwing other branches on
the fire, he entered the tent, where Jeanne and the child were sleeping.

Three or four times during the night Kazan heard the voice of
Gray Wolf calling for the companion she had lost. But Kazan
understood that he should no longer answer her. Towards dawn, Gray Wolf
approached a short distance from the encampment, repeated his call and, to
the first time, Kazan replied.

His howl woke Pierre, who came out of the tent and looked at the
sky, which the dawn was beginning to whiten. He rekindled the fire and began to
preparing breakfast.




VIII

THE INTERSIGN OF DEATH


Pierre stroked Kazan on the head and gave him a piece of meat. Little
afterwards, Jeanne appeared in her turn, leaving the child to rest again. She
ran to kiss her father, then, kneeling before Kazan, she
began to speak to him again, in the same voice with which she had spoken to
Jeannette.

When, with a graceful leap, she then got back to her feet, so that
to give her father a helping hand, Kazan followed her and Jeanne, seeing
that he was now almost upright on his feet, uttered a cry
of joy.

It was a singular journey that began that day. Rock
Radisson had, first of all, emptied the sled of all the objects it
contained, leaving only the folded tent, the blankets, the
food and, for Jeannette, the warm nest of furs. Then he took on a
harnesses and began to pull the sled across the snow. Always
attached, Kazan followed.

Pierre kept coughing and spitting blood. Jeanne was worried.

--It's a bad cold, said Pierre, nothing more. Once home, I
I will keep the room for a good week, and it will no longer appear.

He lied and, when he coughed, turned his head away, then wiped himself
quickly the mouth and the beard, so that Jeanne would not see the
red spots.

Jeanne didn't really know what to think and suspected that he was hiding it from her.
truth. But Kazan, with this strange knowledge of beasts that
man cannot explain and calls instinct, would have said, if he could
speak, what Pierre Radisson concealed. He had heard others
men cough like this, his dog ancestors had heard it too,
while they pulled the sleds, and certainty was formed,
in his brain, of what would inevitably follow.

More than once already, he had, without having entered it, smelled death which
knocked under Indian tents and in white cabins. GOOD
sometimes, just as he could sense the storm and the fire in the distance, he
had sniffed her, while she was still lurking around
those she would soon strike. And this intersign of death, which
hovered in the air, seemed to say to him, as he followed the sleigh
behind Pierre, that she was close, that he brushed past her
each step.

He was in a strange and abnormal agitation. Every time the
sleigh stopped, he came feverishly to sniff the little one
of humanity that was buried in the lynx skin. Jeanne arrived
nimbly, to watch the animal, and passed his hand over the hairs
grayish color of his head. Then he calmed down and joy secretly entered
in him.

The only essential thing that Kazan clearly managed to understand, in
that first day, the little creature on the sled was
infinitely precious to the woman whose caresses he received and who if
spoke to him melodiously. And the more he himself seemed to pay attention
and interested in the little creature, more also the woman seemed
happy and delighted.

In the evening, camp was established as usual and Pierre Radisson
spent another part of the night keeping vigil by the fire. But he doesn't
didn't smoke. He stared fixedly at the flames. When, finally, he
decided to join Jeanne in the tent, he leaned towards Kazan and
examined his wounds.

--You are better, little one, he said to him, and your strength has returned to you. He
Tomorrow you will have to put on the harness and give me a helping hand. Tomorrow
evening we should have reached the river. Otherwise...

He didn't finish his sentence and fought back the cough that was tearing at his face.
chest, then entered the tent.

Kazan remained vigilant and his ears stiff, his eyes full
of anxiety. He hadn't liked Pierre getting under the canvas. Because,
more than ever, mysterious death seemed to hover around this
man.

Three times during the night he heard Gray Wolf repeat her
calls, and he could not resist answering them. Like the day before she
returned, at dawn, to the camp. She was in the wind and
Kazan smelled her scent. He pulled on his tether and cried, hoping that
his companion would pity him and come and lie down next to him.
But, at that moment, Radisson having moved in the tent and made noise,
Gray Wolf, who was ready to risk herself, fled.

The more emaciated was the man's face that morning, and the more
His eyes were bloody. The cough had become less violent.
It was like an internal hissing, which indicated a disintegration
of the organism. And, at all times, Pierre held his hands to his
chest.

When Jeanne saw her father in the early morning, she turned pale.
The worry in his eyes gave way to fear. She threw her arms
around Pierre's neck, who started laughing and coughed harder, in order to
prove that the chest was still good.

--I am on the mend, he said, you can see that clearly. It's a cold
who is leaving. But every cold, my dear leaves it after him, you know that
like me, great weakness and red eyes.

The day that followed was cold and dreary, almost without light. Rock
and Kazan towed the sleigh between them, and Jeanne, on foot,
walked behind, on the traced track. Kazan fired incessantly,
with all his strength, and not once did the man strike him with the whip. But,
from time to time, he would pass his mitten over her head in a friendly manner and
on the back. The weather was getting darker and darker and on the tops of the
trees a faint roaring could be heard passing by, which announced the
coming storm.

The darkness and the imminent approach of the storm did not encourage
Pierre Radisson to stop and camp.

--We must at all costs, he said to himself, reach the river,
yes, at all costs...

He pressed Kazan, for a vigorous effort, while he himself felt,
under the harness, his strength diminishes.

The “blizzard[14]” had begun when, at noon, Pierre stopped to
establish a fire and let everyone warm themselves there.

  [14] Snowstorm.

The snow was falling from the sky in a white deluge, so thick that it
obstructed the view from fifty paces away. Jeanne shrank, shivering,
near his father, with the child in his arms. Peter, in order to
comfort, appeared very cheerful and laughing. Then, after a rest of
hour, he attached Kazan to the harness and took up the straps like him
which he tied around his waist, because their pressure on his chest
caused too much pain.

In almost complete darkness, where everything was silence, the little
caravan, which was still walking through the woods, was moving forward with difficulty. Rock
held his compass in his hand, which he consulted.

Late in the afternoon the trees became sparser and a new
plain appeared below the travelers, towards which Pierre Radisson
pointed his hand, all joyful. But his voice was weak and hoarse,
when he said to Jeanne:

--Here we can camp now, while we wait for the blizzard
calms down.

Under the thick shelter of one of the last clumps of fir trees, he climbed the
tent, then he gathered wood for the fire. Jeanne helped him in this
work. As soon as they had eaten a meal consisting of roast meat and
of rusks, and boiled and drank the coffee, Jeanne, exhausted, threw herself on
a bed of branches, tightly wrapped, with baby, in skins
and in the covers. She hadn't even had the strength that evening,
to give Kazan a good word.

Pierre remained, for a few more moments, motionless, watching closely
from the fire, sitting on the sleigh. Suddenly the alert eyes of Kazan
saw them start, then get up and head towards the tent. He dismissed
the canvas which closed the entrance, and passed through the crack his head and his
shoulders.

--You sleep? Jeanne... he said.

--Not yet, father... But almost... Do you want to come soon?

--Yes, as soon as I have finished my pipe. Are you feeling good?

--Not bad... Only very tired... and with a great desire to
sleep...

Pierre laughed softly, while his throat cleared.

--Jeanne, listen to me. We are almost at home. It's our
river, the Petit-Castor River, which flows at the end of this plain that
we dominate. If I disappeared and if tomorrow, I suppose, you
found yourself alone here, you would only have to walk in a straight line to
arrive at our cabin. It's not more than fifteen miles. You hear me
GOOD?

--Yes, father, I understand.

--Fifteen miles... Straight ahead... to the river... It would be
Impossible, Jeanne, that you get lost. You just need to
be careful, while following the ice of the river, of the air pockets which are
under the snow.

--Yes, father... But come to bed, please. You are exhausted... You
you're a little sick too...

--I finish my pipe.

And he insisted:

--Jeanne, I recommend to you above all these air pockets where, under the
snow, there is only emptiness. With a little attention, they can be guessed
easily. Where they are, the snow is whiter than the rest
ice and it has holes like a sponge.

--Yes...i...i...

Pierre returned towards the fire and towards Kazan.

--Good night, little one, he said. Lying next to the children, I will be better.
Let's go one more day. Fifteen more miles...

Kazan saw him enter the tent. He pulled with all his strength, on his
tied up, until it stopped his breathing. Its paws
and his back contracted. In the tent, there was Jeanne and
the child. He knew well that Pierre would do them no harm. But he
also knew that with Pierre something sinister and imminent
was near them. He would have liked the old man to stay near the fire.
Then he could have rested peacefully, lying on the snow, while
the supervisor.

The inside of the tent was silent.

Closer than the day before, the cry of Gray Wolf resounds, Kazan, closer
although on other evenings, he would have liked her to be near him.
But he refrained from answering her. He didn't dare break the silence
that was in the tent. Broken and sore from the harsh stage of the
day, with his wounds reopened, he remained lying in the snow for a
quite a long time, but without feeling like sleeping.

Towards the middle of the night, the flame of the fire fell. At the top of the trees,
the wind had calmed down. The opaque clouds that veiled the sky
rolled up in thick volutes, like a curtain being drawn, and the
Stars began to sparkle, with a pale, metallic glow. All
there, towards the north, a noise resonated, incisive and monotonous,
like the squealing of the steel runners of a sled speeding along the
frozen snow. It was the mysterious and harmonious celestial melody of
The Aurora Borealis. At the same time, the cold became sharper and the
thermometer kept falling rapidly.

Gray Wolf, without relying solely on her senses, had, that night,
gliding like a shadow, boldly followed the trail marked by the
sled.

And now Kazan heard his voice.

It was no longer the call to the male. She had stopped, rigid and
feverish, trembling in all his limbs, and sent through the air the
Funeral message.

Kazan received him and he too began to howl like dogs do.
savages of the North, in front of the Indian tent where their master has just
breathe your last.

Pierre Radisson was dead.




IX

ON THE ICE RIVER


Dawn appeared when the child, pressing himself closer against the
warm chest of his mother, woke him up by asking for his food.

Jeanne opened her eyes, brushed aside her disheveled hair and the first
object she saw was, on the other side of the tent, the shape
shadow of Pierre Radisson, who seemed to be resting peacefully.

She was very happy about it, because she knew how much the previous day
had been exhausting for his father. In order not to disturb his
sleep, she herself remained motionless in her bed for half an hour
again, cooing softly to her baby.

She finally decided to get up carefully, tucked baby Jeanne into
the blankets and in the furs, and, wrapping themselves in a
thick coat, went to the door of the tent and went out.

The day had now completely broken and she noted, with
satisfaction, that the wind had stopped. The weather was calm; but the
The cold, on the other hand, was terribly sharp and caught her in the face.

Outside, the fire had gone out and Kazan was curled up in a ball near the
cold ashes, his muzzle buried under his own body.

He looked up at Jeanne, shivering, when she appeared. Of his
foot, wearing heavy moccasins, the young woman scattered the ashes
and the blackened logs. Not a spark was left there. She
stroked Kazan's shaggy head with his hand.

--Poor Wolf! she says. I should have thought of giving you last night, for
keep you warm, one of our bear skins!

And she returned to the tent.

She threw back the canvas door and the pale face of her father
appeared to him in full light, Kazan suddenly heard a sinister cry and
heartbreaking, which burst from his lips. No doubt, in fact, was
allowed in front of Pierre Radisson.

Jeanne threw herself on her father's chest, sobbing
muffled, so faint that Kazan's keen hearing could not even pick them up.
perceive. She remained there absorbed in her pain, until the moment when a
baby Jeanne's plaintive cry made her vital energy jump
wife and mother.

It was not time for tears, but for action. She recovered
abruptly on his legs and ran outside. Kazan, pulling on his
chain, wanted to rush to meet her. But she didn't lend it
attention.

Solitude, whose terror is worse than that of death, was on
She. In a second, she was aware of it. And this fear
was nothing to herself; she was all for the child. THE
moans of the unfortunate little creature, which came from the tent
towards her, entered her heart like so many dagger blades.

Then she suddenly remembered everything that Pierre Radisson had told her
said during the previous night: the river that had to be reached at
at all costs, air pockets to avoid on the ice, the cabin at fifteen
miles... “Jeanne, you can’t get lost,” he insisted. He had
undoubtedly predicted what was happening.

She began by returning to the location of the unlit fireplace, which he
Above all, it was important to turn it back on. She collected bark in the snow
dried birch trees, of which she formed a small pile,
intermingling with black, unconsumed logs. Then she entered
the tent to look for matches.

Pierre Radisson used to take his supply in a box
raincoat, which he placed in an inside pocket of his clothing
bear skin. And Jeanne began to sob again, while kneeling
in front of her father, she rummaged, looking for this box.

Having found it, she let the beneficial flame flare high and
reloaded the fire with some of the large logs that Pierre had
made provision. The warmth comforted her and gave her courage. Fifteen
miles... the river which led to the cabin... He had to cover
this distance with baby and with Wolf.

His attention returned to the dog. She thawed, in the heat of
hearth, a piece of meat which she then gave to Kazan to eat, then
melted a little snow for tea for his own use. She
was not hungry and had no desire for food. But she
recalled that her father forced her to eat five or six times a
day, however little it was so that she would not lose her strength. She
therefore forced himself to eat a biscuit and a slice of bread for lunch,
which she washed down with as much hot tea as she could absorb.

Now the terrible hour had arrived. Jeanne wrapped in
blankets, tightly packed, the body of Pierre Radisson, and the
tied strongly with a sinew.

Then she piled the other blankets on the sled, near the fire, and
furs, made a soft bed for baby, which she placed there, and
began to take down the tent. It was not a task for a woman
easy, because the ropes were stiff and frozen. When she had
finished, one of his hands was bleeding. She tied the tent to the sled.

Pierre Radisson was lying uncovered on his bed of antlers. There was no
no other roof above him than the gray sky and the black dome
firs.

Kazan stiffened his paws and sniffed the air. His spine bristled when
the young woman slowly returned towards the immobile object which was
tied up in the covers. She bowed her knee and prayed.

When she returned to the sleigh, her face was pale and flooded with
tears. She took a long look at the sinister Barren, which stretched
as far as the eye can see in front of her. Then, bending towards the wolf-dog, she
hitched her to the harness and, securing herself around her waist
belt that his father had used, they both began to pull.

They walked like this, in the direction indicated by Pierre Radisson.
The walk was painful and slow on the soft snow, which had fallen the day before,
and which the blizzard had piled up in places, in large soft piles.

There was a moment when Jeanne's foot failed, and she collapsed on one of
these snow masses. In her fall, she lost her hat.
fur, and his hair fell on the snow. Immediately Kazan was
near her and, with the tip of his snout, he touched her face.

--Wolf! she moaned. Oh! Wolf!

She got to her feet, as best she could, and the little caravan
started moving forward again.

The river was finally reached and the sled struggled less on the ice, where
the snow was thinner. But a violent wind from the northeast soon
not to blow. He blew in the face and Jeanne bowed her head, while
shooting with Kazan. After half a mile she had to stop,
breathing stopped, and was taken back by a new attack of despair.

A sob rose to his lips. Fifteen thousand! She clenched her hands
on her chest and, bending her back like someone who has been beaten, she
turned, to catch some breath, to the side opposite the wind. She
saw, on the sleigh, the baby who, under furs, was resting
peacefully. This spectacle was for her a fierce spurt and
she faced the struggle again.

Twice more she fell to her knees in piles of snow.
Then she came to a smooth surface where the snow had been completely
swept by the wind. Kazan is enough to pull the sled alone.

Jeanne walked next to the wolfdog. It seemed to him that a thousand
needles entered the skin of his face and, in
despite his heavy clothes, penetrated up to his chest. She had
the idea of ​​consulting the thermometer and took it out of the luggage. When she
exposed him for a few minutes to the open air, she looked at what he
scored. Thirty degrees below zero[15].

  [15] These are degrees Fahrenheit.

Fifteen thousand! And her father told her that she could cover
without incident this distance. But Pierre had probably not foreseen
this biting and formidable cold, nor this cutting wind, which would have terrified the
braver.

The woods were now far behind her and had disappeared into the
half-darkness of a livid mist. There was nothing left, everywhere, but the
Unforgiving and bare Barren, where the river of ice meandered. If there were
had only a few trees, in this desolate landscape, it seemed
Jeanne that her heart would have failed her less. But no, nothing. Nothing where
rest his gaze among this pale gray, uniform and spectral, where the
The sky seemed to touch the earth and blocked the view, less than a mile away.

As she moved forward, the young woman questioned the ground with each step,
trying to discover these air pockets that Pierre had pointed out to him
Radisson and where she could have suddenly disappeared. But she didn't take long
not realizing that everything was becoming similar, on the snow and on the
ice, for his vision blurred by the cold. His eyes were burning, with
increasing pain.

Then the river blossoms into a sort of lake, where the force of the wind
made to such a terrible point that Jeanne stumbled at every minute and
a few inches of snow became an insurmountable obstacle.

Kazan continued, under the harness, to pull with all his might. HAS
she barely managed to follow him and not lose the trail. His
legs were heavy as lead and she walked with difficulty,
whispering a prayer for her child.

It suddenly seemed to her that the sleigh was nothing more than a sleigh in front of her.
imperceptible black spot. A fear seized her. Kazan and baby Jeanne
abandoned him! And she let out a loud cry. But that was just one
optical illusion for his bleary eyes. The sled was not
about twenty steps away and a brief effort was enough for him to
join him.

She fell into it with a groan, throwing her arms wildly around the
baby Jeanne's neck and buried her head in the furs, closing the
eyes. For a second, she had the impression of happy “home”...
Then, just as quickly, the sweet vision faded and she came back to sense
reality.

Kazan had stopped. He sat on his behind looking at her.

She remained motionless, lying on the sleigh, and he waited
let her move and speak to him. As she still did not move, he
came towards her and smelled her. It was in vain.

And suddenly he raised his head and sniffed, facing the wind. THE
wind brought him something.

He began to nudge Jeanne again, with his snout, as if to warn her.
But she remained inert. He moaned miserably and gave a long
barking, sharp and plaintive.

However, the unknown thing that the wind brought was becoming more
sensitive and Kazan, vigorously tightening his harness, got back into position.
walks, dragging Jeanne after him.

The weight, thus increased, that he was pulling, required an effort from his muscles.
considerable and the sled, whose runners creaked, moved forward
painfully. At any moment he had to stop and take a breath. And,
each time, he sniffed the air with his quivering nostrils. He was coming back
also towards Jeanne and moaned near her, to wake her.

He fell into soft snow and it was only inch by inch that he
managed to get the sled out. Then he found the smooth ice and he
pulled with all the more enthusiasm as the source of the mysterious odor
brought by the wind seemed closer to him.

A gap in one of the banks gave outlet to a tributary of the river,
frozen like him in this season. If Jeanne had had her knowledge,
it is in this direction that she would have ordered the wolf-dog to head. THE
Kazan flair served as his guide.

Ten minutes later, he burst into a joyous bark, to which people responded
those of half a dozen sled dogs. A log cabin
was there, at the edge of the river, in a small cove dominated by a
fir woods, and smoke rose from its roof. It was this smoke
whose smell had reached him.

The shore rose steeply and evenly towards the hut, Kazan
gathered all his strength and hoisted the sleigh, with its burden,
to the door. After which, he sat down next to the inanimate Jeanne, raised
nose towards the dark sky, and screamed.

Almost immediately the door opened and a man came out of the cabin.

With his eyes reddened by the cold and the wind, Kazan saw the man, pushing
an exclamation of surprise, leaning towards Jeanne, on the sleigh. In
at the same time, we heard the voice coming from the mass of furs
whimpering and half-choked sound of the baby.

Kazan was exhausted. His beautiful strength was gone. Its legs were
scratched and bleeding. But the child's voice filled him with joy and he
lay down quietly, in his harness, while the man carried away
mother and baby in the invigorating warmth of the cabin.

Then the man reappeared. He was not old like Pierre Radisson.

He approached Kazan and, looking at him:

--So it's you, just heaven! who, all alone, brought her back to me... My
compliments, comrade!

He leaned over him, without fear, and untying the harness, invited him to
enter in turn.

Kazan seemed to hesitate. At that precise moment, it seemed to him, in the
fury of the wind which had not calmed down, hearing the voice of Louve
Grey. He turned his head away, but then decided to enter.

The cabin door closed behind him. He went to bed in a
dark corner, while the man prepared for Jeanne, on the stove, some
hot food.

The young woman, whom the man had laid down on a bunk, did not return
not immediately to her. But, from his corner, Kazan, who was dozing,
suddenly heard her sobbing and, having looked up, he saw her
ate shortly after, in the company of the stranger.

Kazan, crawling, slipped under the bed. Then, the night being
completely come, everything in the cabin fell back into silence.

The next day, at daybreak, as soon as the man opened the door,
Kazan took the opportunity to slip out and quickly run into the
plain. It wasn't long before he found Gray Wolf's trail and called her.
His answer came to him, from the icy river, and he ran towards her.

A grove of fir trees served as their shelter and they both went there
concealed. But in vain Gray Wolf tried to persuade Kazan to
flee with him, to safer retreats, far from the cabin and
the smell of man.

A little later, Kazan, still on the lookout, saw the man from the
cabin which harnessed its dogs and installed Jeanne on the sled,
wrapping her and the child in furs, as the
old Peter. Then, the sleigh having set off, Kazan followed his
track and, all day followed him, some distance behind,
himself followed by Gray Wolf, who glided in his footsteps, like a
shadow.

The journey continued until nightfall. The wind had died down. Under the
bright stars and under the calm moon, the man urged the team.
It was not until late in the hour that the sleigh reached a second
cabin, at the door of which the man knocked.

From the thick shadows where he stood, Kazan saw a light appear and
the door opens. He heard the joyful voice of another man,
which replied that of Jeanne and her companion. So he leaves
went to join Gray Wolf.

Three days later, Jeanne's husband returned to look for the body.
frozen by Pierre Radisson. Kazan took advantage of his absence to return to the
cabin, towards the young woman and towards the caress of her hand.

During the days and weeks that followed, he divided his time
between this cabin and Louve Grise. He tolerated near Jeanne the
presence of the younger man who lived with her and with the child,
as he had tolerated that of Pierre Radisson. He understood that
he was a loved one for her and they both loved the baby of a
equal love.

Half a mile away, at the top of an enormous rock mass that
the Indians called the Sun Rock[16], he and Louve Grise had,
their side, found their “home” in a suitable crevasse. They were there
established their den, from where they each descended into the plain, to
hunt. Often the voice of the young woman rose to their ears,
called:

  [16] The Rock of the Sun.

--Kazan! Kazan! Kazan!

Thus passed the long winter of the North Land, Kazan coming and going
from Sun Rock to the cabin, and Jeanne's husband occupying his time going
place, then raise its traps, where it captured fur-bearing animals,
small and large, ermines, martens, mink, foxes of various varieties
various, which were numerous in the region.

Then spring returned and, with it, the Great Change.




X

THE BIG CHANGE


Nature was waking up everywhere in the Wilderness. The sun, higher
in the sky, illuminated with a marvelous brilliance the rocks and the sites of the
mountains. In the valleys, the poplar buds were ready to
to burst. The scent of baldrics and fir trees was felt every day
more penetrating. In the plains as in the forests, we heard
without rest the lapping murmur of the waters, coming from the melting of
snow, which flooded the ground and made its way towards the
Hudson Bay[17].

  [17] Hudson Bay is a vast inland sea, which sinks
    deep into Canadian territory and measures no less than
    a thousand kilometers from north to south. She communicates with the Atlantic
    by the Hudson Strait and, at its northern extremity, with the
    Baffin Sea and the Arctic Ocean through the Fox Channel, which is located
    under the Arctic Circle.

In the immense bay, the ice fields cracked and collapsed
without respite, with a noise like the rolls of thunder, and the
choppy waves rushed towards the Arctic Ocean, at the Roes
Welcome[18]. The resulting violent current of air still made,
at times, passing in the April wind the cold sting of winter.

  [18] The “Welcome of the Deer”, gateway to the Fox Canal.

The Sun Rock rose in a single jet, dominating the tops of the fir trees which
surrounded him. His bald head received the first rays of the sun
sunrise and the last lights of the sunset still clung to it. On
this sunny summit, Kazan's den was well sheltered against the
bad winds, against which it opened, and he rested there
deliciously from the past six terrible winter months.

Almost all day he slept, with Gray Wolf lying next to him,
flat stomach, legs extended, nostrils constantly alert of
the smell of the man, who was close.

She kept staring at Kazan anxiously as he slept and
dreamed. She growled, baring her fangs, and her own hairs
bristled, when she saw those of her companion stand up on her
spine. Sometimes also, a simple contraction of the leg muscles and
a wrinkle of the muzzle alone indicated that he was under the effect of the
dream.

So it often happened that, responding to the wolf-dog's thought, a
voices rose and came as far as the Sun Rock, while on the threshold of
his cabin a young woman with blue eyes appeared.

--Kazan! Kazan! Kazan! said the voice.

Gray Wolf pricked up her ears, while Kazan awoke and,
the next moment, he stood on his feet. He jumped towards the
highest point of the rock and began to moan, while the voice
renewed his appeal. Gray Wolf, who had gently followed him, posed
his muzzle on his shoulder. She knew what this call meant and,
even more than the noise and the smell of the man, she feared him.

Since she had abandoned the horde of her brothers and lived with
Kazan, the Voice had become Gray Wolf's worst enemy and she
hated. For she took Kazan from him, and wherever the Voice was, he
was going too. Every time he pleased her, she stole his
companion, who left her alone to wander, all night, under the moon and
under the stars. When thus the Voice made her a widow, she remained
faithful however and, without responding to the cries of his brothers
savages, awaited the return of Kazan. Sometimes when Kazan lent
her ear to the Voice, she nibbled him lightly, to show him
his displeasure, and growled towards the Voice.

Now, that day, as the Voice sounded for the third time, Louve
Grise, instead of attaching herself to Kazan and trying to hold him back, he
suddenly turned his back and hid at the bottom of his den.

She lay down there, and Kazan saw, in the darkness, only her two
eyes that blazed, fierce.

He climbed towards the extreme point of Sun Rock, by the narrow, worn track
under his clutches, and remained undecided. Since the day before, a certain
trouble, which he could not explain, was within him. There was
new one lurking on the Sun Rock. He did not see it, but
felt.

He went back down towards Gray Wolf and stuck his head at the entrance to the
lair. He was greeted, not by the customary caressing complaint,
but by a threatening growl, which made the fangs curl up on its fangs.
lips of the she-wolf.

For the fourth time the Voice was heard and Gray Wolf slammed
fiercely jaws. Kazan, after further hesitation, decided
got off the Sun Rock and headed in the direction of the cabin.

By the instinct of distrust of the Wild, which was in him, he did not warn
never upon his arrival, by no barking. He appeared so suddenly, and
without warning, Jeanne, who was holding her baby in her arms,
jumped, seeing in the door the bushy head and the
broad shoulders of Kazan. But, not at all frightened, the child became agitated and
contorted with pleasure, and held out her two handcuffs towards the wolfdog,
by sending a nice gibberish to his address.

--Kazan! exclaimed Jeanne gently, with a gesture of welcome. Come
here, Kazan!

The wild glow, ardent like fire, which shone in the eyes
of Kazan, fell. He had stopped, one paw on the threshold of the cabin,
and seemed reluctant to move forward. Then, suddenly, lowering the plume
with his tail, he crashed to the ground and crawled in on his belly,
like a dog caught at fault.

He was fond of the creatures that lived in the cabin. But the
cabin itself, he hated it. Because every cabin smelled of clubs,
whipping and bondage. For himself, and like all dogs of
sled, he preferred, to sleep, to the walls of a well-closed niche,
the ground covered with snow and the roof of the sky or fir trees.

Under the caress of Jeanne's hand, Kazan experienced this delicious little
customary thrill, which was his reward, when he left for
Louve Grise and the Wild cabin. Slowly he raised his head, until
his black muzzle came to rest on the young woman's knees. Then he
closed his eyes blissfully, while the mysterious little creature
who was baby Jeanne pestered him, with cute kicks, and, with her
small hands, pulled his rough hairs. Even more than the caress of
the young woman, these childish games to which he was the object made her
happiness.

Immobile and focused on himself, like a sphinx, and as if petrified,
Kazan stood there without moving, barely breathing. Jeanne's husband
did not like to see him like this and was always worried, in this case, about
what the mysterious brain of the wolfdog could be ruminating on. But the
young woman was more confident in Kazan and knew he was incapable of
treason.

--Good old Kazan, she said, I thank you for coming to my call.
Baby and I will be alone tonight. The little one's dad left for
Nearest post and we're counting on you to keep us safe.

She tickled his muzzle with the end of her long silky braid.
her hair. Which, whatever his desire not to flinch,
made Kazan huff and sneeze, much to the brat's great joy.

Then Jeanne, having got up, busied herself, during the rest of the day, with
pack up all kinds of objects that were in the cabin,
Kazan, who was observing him, was very surprised by this enigmatic maneuver.
Something he sensed, but could not understand,
was undoubtedly preparing.

In the evening, after caressing him a lot, Jeanne said to him:

--Isn't it true, Kazan, that you would defend us this night, if danger
threatened us? Now I'm going to lock the door, because you have to
stay with us until tomorrow morning.

She began to pet the wolfdog again, with emotion. His hand was trembling
nervously.

--Soon, you know, she continued, we are going to leave, to return
at our place. Our fur harvest is finished. Yes, we are leaving again
all over there, where my husband's parents live, where there are
cities, with large churches, theaters and concerts of
music, and a lot of other of the most beautiful things that are in this world.
And we will take you with us, Kazan!

Kazan did not understand what Jeanne was saying to him, but he waved his hand
tail, very happy to see that the young woman was talking to him. It
forgot Gray Wolf and his grudge against the cabin, and he went to
sleep quietly in a corner.

But when Jeanne and the child had fallen asleep, when the silence
fell back into the night, his uneasiness took over him. He got on his
paws and furtively circled around the room, sniffing
walls, the door, and all the objects packed by Jeanne.

He groaned. The young woman, half awake, heard him and whispered:

--Keep quiet, Kazan! Go to sleep... Go to sleep...

Then he did not move any more and remained motionless in the middle of the room,
worried and listening.

And through the log walls of the cabin he heard a moan
distant which came faintly towards him. It was the cry of Louve
Grey. This cry, however, differed from the one he was accustomed to hearing.
It wasn't a call from loneliness. It was something completely different.

He ran quickly towards the closed door and began to moan again. But Jeanne
and the child were sound asleep and did not hear him.

Once again the cry resounded and everything was silent again. Kazan spread out
outside the door and spent the rest of the night there.

It was there that Jeanne found him, very alert, when the next morning,
early she woke up. She opened the door a crack and, in one
second, he was outside. At full speed, he rushed towards the Sun Rock,
whose rising sun tinted the peak with a golden glow.

He climbed there quickly, along the narrow and rough track, and found no
point that Gray Wolf had come to meet him.

He reached the den and sniffed the air, his back bristling and his paws
stiff. Something new was in the air and that something
was of life. He slipped into the crack made between two rocks
and, putting his head forward, found himself face to face with Gray Wolf, who was not
not alone.

Gray Wolf let out a plaintive moan. The hairs flattened out
Kazan's back and he responded with a tender grunt. Then
slowly he retreated and, in the light of dawn, he lay down in front of
the entrance to the den, making the she-wolf, with her body, like a
shield.

Gray Wolf was a mother.




XI

THE TRAGEDY ON SUN ROCK


All that day Kazan remained on the Sun Rock. The feeling of
new fatherhood was louder than the call of the cabin.

At dusk, Gray Wolf got up from her bed and they both went
take a walk together under the fir trees. The she-wolf, with cubs
growls, gently nibbling Kazan's shaggy neck. And Kazan,
according to the old instinct of his fathers, responded by caressing his
tongue of Gray Wolf's mouth. She expressed her satisfaction
with a series of jerky gasps, which were his way of laughing.

Then, suddenly, she heard a small, plaintive cry that came all the way to
She. She hastened to leave Kazan and climb back towards the den, where
one of her three little ones called her.

Kazan understood that Gray Wolf must no longer leave, at this hour, the
summit of Sun Rock and that he had to go hunting alone, in order to
provide food for his mate and that of his brood. As soon as
the moon was up, so he set out in search of game and, towards dawn,
he returned to the lodging, bringing in his jaws a large white rabbit.
Gray Wolf was gluttonously satisfied with it. And Kazan knew, from then on, that each
night he must now act the same.

The next day, nor the one after that, he did not go towards the cabin, what
that he heard the voice of Jeanne and that of her husband, who were calling him.
Only on the fourth day did he reappear and Jeanne gave him a big celebration,
as well as the baby who, while babbling, kicked him hard,
which he could barely feel through his thick fur.

--I hope, said Jeanne's husband, that we will not repent one day.
day of having taken him with us and that his wild instinct
will never regain the upper hand. But I wonder how you'll get used to it,
old devil to our existence there. This will change you a lot
forests where you have always lived.

--I will regret them no less, my forests, replied Jeanne. With my
poor dad, I too lived there for so long! This is why, without
doubt, that I love my good old Kazan so much. After you and the baby, it's
him, I believe, whom I love the most on earth.

As for Kazan, even more than he had already felt, he felt
that an unknown event was brewing in the cabin. It was not, on the
ground, only packages and bales.

It was the same all week. Kazan was so agitated that
Jeanne's husband couldn't help but notice, one evening:

--I think he really knows. He understood that we were preparing our
departure. But when can we leave? The river started again yesterday
overflowing and it is, for the moment, impossible to navigate. If
the flood continues, we will still be here in eight days, maybe
Longer.

A few more days passed and the moment arrived when, during the
night, the full moon illuminated with its dazzling light the summit of the Sun
Rock. Gray Wolf took the opportunity to carry out, with her three little ones, everything
staggering behind her, her first exit from the den.

The three little furry balls fell and stumbled with every step,
and huddled against her, as clumsy with their movements as the
cabin baby. Kazan watched them with curiosity. He heard them
emit the same inarticulate and soft sounds, the same whining,
and he looked at them as Jeanne's child did on his two
little legs, going all crooked on their four legs
soft. A spectacle which filled him with infinite joy.

When the moon was at its zenith and the night had almost become equal
of the day, Kazan tore himself away from the contemplation of his offspring and,
tumbling from the rock, went hunting.

He met, right from the start, a big white rabbit, which fled between his
paws. For half a mile he pursued him without being able to
join. He understood that it was wiser to abandon the game. He
would, in fact, have tired out a reindeer or a caribou in the race, which goes
in front of them, opening a wide trail, easy to follow. It is not
the same for small game, which slips under the thickets and among
the thickets, and that a simple fox is more apt to reach than a
wolf.

So he continued to walk through the forest, silently searching, step by step.
of velvet, and he had the chance to come across unexpectedly another
white rabbit, who hadn't heard him. A quick jump, then a second
put Gray Wolf's expected supper into her mouth.

Kazan trotted back, very quietly, spending time
to another on the self, to rest the jaws, the booted rabbit
snow[19] which weighed a good seven pounds.

  [19] Nickname commonly given, in Canada, to white rabbits.

Arriving at the foot of Sun Rock and the narrow track which rose towards the
at the top, he stopped abruptly. There was a lukewarm smell on this trail
again, not strangers.

Suddenly, the rabbit fell from his jaws. An electric spark
suddenly ran over every hair on his body. The smell he smelled
was not that of a rabbit, a marten or a porcupine.
They were sharp claws that had left their mark on the
ground and climbed the rock.

At this moment frightening and confused noises reached him, which
made the steep climb, in one go, with a terrible howl,
path.

A little below the summit, in the white moonlight, on a
narrow platform made in the rock and which overlooked the void,
Gray Wolf was engaged in a fight to the death with a huge lynx
gray. She had fallen under her adversary, and uttered shrill cries
and desperate.

After having, for a moment, remained as if rooted to the spot, Kazan, like a
arrow, rushed into battle. It was the silent and rapid assault of
wolf, combined with the more learned strategy of the husky.

Another animal would have died from the first attack. But the lynx
is the most flexible and alert creature in Wilderness. Also
the Indians call it “the Rapid”. Kazan had aimed for the vein
jugular and had counted that its inch-long fangs were there
would grip deeply. The lynx, in an infinitesimal fraction of
second, had thrown itself back and Kazan's fangs did not seize
than the cottony, bushy mass of hair on his neck.

The adversary with whom he had to fight, and who had abandoned Louve
Grey, was far more formidable than a wolf or a husky. Once already,
he had found himself grappling with a lynx, which had fallen into a trap, and he
had learned useful lessons from combat.

He knew that it is not appropriate to strive to overthrow the lynx on the
back, as one must do with another opponent. Because the big cat
of the Wild fights with claws even more than with fangs. And these claws,
sharp as so many razors, quickly made to lacerate the
belly of his enemy and to open his entrails.

Kazan, behind him, heard Gray Wolf, seriously injured, moaning and
howl miserably. He tried to renew his death grip on the
throat. But this time again, the shot missed and the lynx escaped the
dead, less than an inch. Kazan, however, had firmly grasped it and
he didn't let go.

The two beasts remained closely grappling. The claws of the big one
cat plowed the coasts of Kazan, without reaching, fortunately,
no vital part. Suddenly, so cramped was the space where they
were fighting, the two adversaries arrived, without them
realized, at the edge of the rock and, suddenly, fell
together in a vacuum.

It was a fall of fifty to sixty feet, during which Kazan and
the lynx turned around several times. They were struggling with a
such rage that Kazan's fangs did not lose their grip and
the lynx continued to play with its paws and claws.

The collision of their two bodies against the ground was so harsh that it separated them
and sent them rolling a dozen feet apart.

Kazan immediately got up and ran towards the lynx in order to
resume the battle. But the lynx lay on the ground, motionless and
flabby, flooded with the blood which, in great gushes, flowed from his throat.
Seeing this, he cautiously approached, sniffing, and defensively
against any possible trickery. However, he was able to see that the victory
he had left and that the big cat was indeed dead. So he dragged himself
towards Gray Wolf.

He found her in the den, near the bodies of her three cubs, whom
the lynx had torn to pieces. She whined and whined to his face
two. Kazan, to console her, began to lick her head and
shoulders, which were bleeding. Throughout the rest of the night she continued
to moan horribly.

It was only when the day came that Kazan was free to
witness, in its entirety, the terrible work of the lynx. Gray Wolf was
blind. Her sparkling eyes were now closed to the light, no
not for a day or a night, but forever. Obscure
darkness, which no sun could no longer pierce, had set its
shroud on his eyes.

And, by this natural instinct which is in the beast for everything it
unable to reason, Kazan understood that his companion was, at that moment,
become more helpless in life than the unfortunate little
creatures which, a few hours before, had been frolicking around her.

In vain, all day long, Jeanne called him. When his voice reached the
Sun Rock, Gray Wolf, who heard him, hurried closer, afraid,
against Kazan. Kazan immediately folded his ears and more
affectionately licked her.

Towards the end of the afternoon, Kazan came down from the Sun Rock and, after
wandered the forest for a while, brought Gray Wolf a white rabbit.
She passed her snout over the animal's hair, sniffing at the flesh, but
refused to eat.

Sorry, Kazan thought that the proximity of the dead cubs caused his
sorrow and, pushing her, with little inviting barks, he
invited him to come down from the tragic rock. Gray Wolf followed him and, all
sliding, reached the base. Then, without stopping touching
snout the side of her guide, she left with him, under the fir trees.

The first slightly deep ditch that he had to cross stopped him and his
helplessness, even more so, Kazan realized. In vain he
invited him to run up and jump with him. She was whining, and twenty
time lay down on the ground, before daring the necessary jump. She
finally risked, with a stiff and inflexible jump, and fell heavily
near Kazan. And less than ever, after that, she moved away from him,
however little it was. She felt that to be safe, her side should not
must no longer leave his companion's side, nor his muzzle his shoulder.

They walked half a mile in this way. Gray Wolf, who was learning to walk
in his blindness, staggered and fell at every moment. A rabbit wearing
snow having appeared in the twilight, Kazan ran after it and,
instinctively, after having made about twenty leaps, looked in
back if Gray Wolf followed him. She remained motionless, like
frozen on its feet. He left the rabbit and returned to her.

Together they spent the night in a thicket and, the next day
only, Kazan, leaving Gray Wolf there, went to visit the
hut.

There he found the young woman and her husband, who immediately noticed the
wounds, poorly healed, which he had on his shoulders and sides.

--It can only be with a bear or a lynx that he fought, remarked
the man. A wolf would not have caused such injuries to him.

Jeanne bandaged these wounds with her gentle hand. While talking to
Kazan, she washed them with lukewarm water, anointed them with a salutary ointment,
and Kazan experienced a delicious well-being. For half an hour, he
rested on the skirt of the young woman's dress, who had sat down
on purpose, near him. Then he looked at her blissfully as she came and went
in the room, putting away mysterious packages and preparing the meal.

The day passed like this, far from the forgotten forest, and the moon was already
lifted when Kazan decided to join Gray Wolf. If Jeanne had
could guess that the poor creature, for whom Kazan was henceforth everything in
life, the sun, the stars, the moon and sustenance, lay in
her thicket, she would have gone to rescue Gray Wolf herself. But she
ignored it.

Eight more days passed, during which, resuming his old
habits, Kazan divided his time between the thicket and the hut. Then,
one afternoon, the man put a necklace around his neck with a solid
strap, which he then attached to an iron clamp, in the wall of
logs.

They left him there all day and all night, and the next day, from
At daybreak, Jeanne and her husband were up.

Jeanne's husband took the baby in his arms and went out first.
Jeanne followed, holding the strap and Kazan in her hand. The cabin door
was closed and firmly locked, planks and trunks of
young trees were nailed externally to the shutters, and the procession
went down to the river bank, where a large canoe was waiting,
fully charged. The day before, another man had come and taken
him the sleigh and the dogs of the team.

Jeanne climbed into the canoe first, with the child and with Kazan,
whom she made to sleep next to her. She took her place at the helm, her
husband grabbed the oars and the boat moved away from the shore, over
the water.

The young woman, still holding in her hand the strap that held Kazan,
turned towards the cabin, which was about to disappear behind the trees,
and greeted her with a gesture. A great emotion was imprinted on his
face. Her eyes were wet with tears.

--Farewell! Farewell! she cried.

--You have no sorrow at least? her husband asked her. This
upset that we're leaving?

--No no! she replied quickly. But I loved these beautiful forests and
this wild nature. Almost my whole life has passed there, in the company
of my poor father, whose body I leave behind me. No city,
for me, will never be worth that.

A sob choked in her throat and she looked back at the
baby...

For several minutes, the canoe, caught by the current, had been spinning
quickly.

Standing out from one of the banks of the wide river, a long strip of sand
jutted out into the water and formed a sort of flat and
naked.

Jeanne's husband, calling her, showed her, on this sandy tongue,
a small dark spot that came and went. She recognized Gray Wolf,
Gray Wolf whose dull eyes turned towards Kazan. In the absence of
the sight, the air, which she inhaled, told her that Kazan, and the man and the
woman with him, went away, went away, went away...

Kazan stood stiffly on his paws and looked.

Gray Wolf, however, who understood, from the sound of the oars, that the
pirogue was moving away, had come to the very edge of the water. There, having
sitting on her behind, she raised her head towards this sun which for her
had no more rays, and threw to the address of Kazan a long and
resounding clamor.

The strap slipped from Jeanne's hand. The canoe made a formidable
lurched and a large brown body pierced the air. Kazan had disappeared.

The man had already taken and aimed his rifle in the direction of Kazan,
who was swimming.

--The Rogue! he said. He's losing our politeness! I'll teach you...

No less quickly, Jeanne had stopped her action. She was very pale
and shouted:

--No! dont shoot! Let him return to her! Leave him,
leave him!... That is his place!

Kazan, having reached the shore, shook off his streaming hairs. A
last time, he looked towards the canoe which was taking Jeanne and which,
a few minutes later, had disappeared.

Gray Wolf had won!




XII

IN THE DAYS OF FIRE


More and more, from then on, Kazan forgot his former life as a dog.
sled. For him it was nothing more than a distant reminiscence, like
these erased memories which sometimes come back to us, similar to
lights in the night.

The birth and death of the cubs, the terrible tragedy of the Sun
Rock, the fight with the lynx and the blindness of Gray Wolf, who had
result, then the departure of Jeanne and the baby, alone occupied his
spirit.

The revenge taken from the lynx had not restored Gray Wolf's sight and
it was a perpetual disappointment for Kazan that she was no longer
capable of hunting with him, in the infinite plain or in the forest
obscure. Also his resentment against the lynx tribes was alive and
deep, and he had become the mortal enemy of the whole race.

Not only did he attribute Gray Wolf's blindness and death to the lynx.
cubs, but also the departure of Jeanne and the child. And,
every time his nose discovered the scent of the big gray cat, he
became furious like a demon, grimacing and growling while rolling up
his lips on his long fangs. All the ancestral savagery of the Wild
reappeared in him.

A new code of life was established little by little between Kazan and its
blind companion. When they walked together, Gray Wolf had
learned not to lose it, by standing side to side, shoulder to shoulder
with him, and Kazan, for his part, knew that if they remained united,
that he should not jump, but always trot. He also understood
that he had to choose land easily accessible to the paws of
Gray Wolf. And, if he came to a place that had to be crossed with a
leaping, he touched Gray Wolf with his muzzle and uttered little cries
complaining. Then she pricked up her ears and took off. But,
as she could not calculate the exact length of the necessary jump,
she always jumped, so as not to risk falling halfway,
further than was useful. Which, sometimes, also presented its
disadvantages. Thus, the two animals came to
to understand.

Finally, smell and hearing had, in compensation for lost sight,
developed with greater acuity at Louve Grise. And always Kazan, who
had noticed it, observed his companion and referred to her, if he
was either to listen to a suspicious noise, or to smell the air or to
sniff out a trail.

At the moment when the canoe had disappeared, an instinct more infallible than
reasoning had told Kazan that Jeanne, her baby and her husband
had left never to return. And yet, from the den where he
had settled down for the summer, with Louve-Grise, under a thick bouquet of
fir and balsam trees, close to the river, he persisted, every day, in
weeks, to come and question the cabin.

Impatient, he watched for some sign of life. But the door didn't open
Never. The planks and small tree trunks were still
nailed to the window shutters and, from the chimney, not a spiral of
smoke rose. The grasses and vines were beginning to
cover the path and the walls with logs, and the smell of man,
impregnated with these walls, which he sniffed, was becoming more and more
weak.

One day he found, under one of the closed windows, a small moccasin
child. It was old and worn, blackened by snow and rain. He
was enough, however, to make Kazan happy, who lay down right next to
and remained there for many hours. And, during this time, at this same moment,
the baby, thousands of miles away, was being
entertain with the wonderful toys invented by civilization. This does not
It was only at the end of the day that Kazan went to join Gray Wolf,
among the fir and balsam trees.

It was only during these visits to the cabin that Gray Wolf
did not accompany Kazan. All the rest of the time, the two beasts were
inseparable. When they had tracked a game, Kazan took the
hunting, and Gray Wolf was waiting for him. The white rabbits were their
ordinary pasture. On a beautiful moonlit night, there arrived, a
once in Kazan to wear out a young deer while running and kill it. As
the prey was too heavy for him to bring it back to Gray Wolf, he
ran to fetch her and brought her back to the place of the feast.

Then came the big fire.

Gray Wolf caught the smell while the fire was still two days away
West. The sun that evening set in a pale cloud and
sinister. The moon, which succeeded it, opposite the sky, appeared completely
red and purple. When she thus emerges from the desert, the Indians
call the “Bleeding Moon” and the air is filled with omens for them
disastrous.

The next morning, Gray Wolf became strangely nervous and, around
At noon, Kazan, in turn, smelled in the air the warning she had
perceived many hours before him. The smell, from minute to minute,
increased in intensity and, a little later in the day, the sun
was veiled in a layer of smoke.

The fire, which ran through the woods and forests of fir trees and
balsam trees, had started by raging in the direction of the north. Then
the wind jumped from south to west, blowing the winds in the opposite direction
columns of smoke. It was becoming more and more likely that the fire
would only stop at the edge of the river, towards which the moving blaze
chased before him a thousand panicked beasts.

During the night that followed, the sky continued to burn with an immense
sooty glow and, when daylight broke, the heat and smoke
became untenable and suffocating.

Panicked, Kazan struggled to find a way to escape. He
It would have been easy for him to swim across the river. But
Gray Wolf, whom he had never left for a second, refused to do so. Of the
the first contact of its claws with the water, at the edge of which it
had brought her, she stood back, contracting all her muscles. HAS
twelve different times, he jumped into the current and swam in
the caller. All Gray Wolf agreed to was to come forward
in the water as long as she had her feet. Then, stubbornly, she
always went back.

Now we could hear the low roar of the fire. Elks,
reindeer, deer, caribou threw themselves into the water and, splitting the current,
reached the opposite bank without difficulty. A big black bear, accompanied by
his two cubs, who were dragging themselves heavily, did the same, and the
little ones followed him. Kazan looked at him with his burning eyes and began to
moaning towards Gray Wolf, who refused to move.

Other wild beasts of the Wild, who feared water as much as she did,
and did not want, or could not swim, came to take refuge on
the narrow and bare strip of sand which, a little further on, advanced
in the river.

There was a big fat porcupine there, a little marten with the shapes
slender, and a fishing cat, who kept sniffing the air and
whine like a child. Hundreds of ermines crowded the
light sand, like a legion of rats, and their little voices
piercings formed an uninterrupted chorus. Many foxes
were running, panicked, looking for a tree felled by the wind
across the river, which could serve as a bridge for them to cross over to the other
shore. But the river was too wide. There were also brothers from
breed of Gray Wolf, wolves, who hesitated before crossing the
swim.

Dripping with water and panting, half suffocated by the heat and the
smoke, Kazan came to take his place next to Gray Wolf. He understood
that the only refuge left to them was the spit of sand and he set out
duty bound to take his companion there.

As they approached the small isthmus which connected the sand to the shore,
they felt their nostrils tighten, and only moved forward with
precaution. Their senses told them that an enemy was not far away.

They did not take long, in fact, to discover a large lynx, which had taken
possession of the passage and which, lying on the ground, spread widely
the entrance to the sand strip. Three porcupines, unable to pass
Besides, they had curled up into a ball, their quills alert and quivering. A
fishing cat, finding himself in the same situation, growled timidly towards the
lynx which, having seen Kazan and Gray Wolf, lowered its ears and
began to warn himself.

Already Gray Wolf, full of ardor and forgetting her blindness, was about to pounce
towards the enemy. Kazan, with an irritated growl, stopped him suddenly,
shoulder, and she remained there, both foaming and plaintive,
while Kazan marched alone into battle.

With light steps, ears pointed forward, without any threat
apparent in his attitude, he moved forward. She was the murderer
strategy of the husky, skilled in the art of killing.

A man accustomed to civilization would not have failed to think that the
wolf dog approached the lynx with very friendly intentions. But
the lynx knew what to expect. Ancestral instinct had taught him,
to him too, that he was facing an enemy. What he didn't know
However, the Sun Rock tragedy had made this enemy more
fierce again.

The fishing cat had understood for his part that a great battle was going to take place.
surrender, and he crashed to the ground, at ground level. As to
porcupines, they were peeping desperately, like little children who have
very frightened, and they raised their quills more straight.

Among the increasingly dense clouds of smoke, the lynx had
flattened on its stomach, as felines do, the hindquarters
picked up and contracted for momentum.

Around him Kazan began to spin, light and almost imponderable, and
the lynx turned on itself, no less alert and rapid. Eight feet
approximately separated them.

It was the lynx which, like a ball, was the first to leap onto its
opponent. Kazan made no attempt to escape by jumping aside. He appears
of the shoulder and, as he had more weight, he absorbed the shock without
flinch. The big cat was thrown into the air, along with the razor blades of
his twenty claws, and fell heavily on the ground, his limbs
marmalade.

Kazan took advantage of the moment and, without wasting time, rushed
on the nape of the lynx's neck.

Gray Wolf, in turn, had jumped. Under Kazan's hindquarters,
she implanted her jaws in one of the enemy's hind legs.
The bone cracked.

The lynx, overwhelmed by the double weight that weighed on him, attempted a
desperate start. Taking with him Kazan and the she-wolf, who were able to
fortunately freeing himself in time, he fell on one of the porcupines
who were there. A hundred of the dreaded needles
entered the body. Mad with pain and screaming like a man possessed, he
fled and, rushing into the blaze, disappeared among the
smoke.

Kazan was careful not to pursue him there. The fishing cat lay like a dead man,
spying on Kazan and Gray Wolf with her little black and fierce eyes. THE
porcupines were chirping and chattering worse than ever, as if
beg for mercy.

The flame, however, had reached the shore. The air was hot like
a furnace. Kazan and Gray Wolf hurried to come and start
the shelter, at the end of the tongue of sand, which completely covered
a sheet of smoke.

They rolled over, hiding their heads under their bellies.
The roar of the fire was like that of a great cataract
and we heard enormous cracking noises, which were those of the trees which
were collapsing. The air was filled with ashes and burning sparks.
Several times Kazan had to unroll himself and, getting up, shake the
flaming brands which fell on him, driven by the wind, and which
singed his hair and burned his skin, like so many irons
red.

On the banks of the river grew, with its feet in the water, a thick row
green brushwood, where the fire stopped. The couple took refuge there. Then
the heat and smoke began to diminish in intensity.

But it was only after a long time that Kazan and Gray Wolf
were able to clear their heads and breathe more freely. Without this
favorable strip of sand, they would have been completely roasted. Because everywhere
behind them, nature had become completely black and the ground was
completely calcined.

The smoke finally clears. The wind rose again to the north and east, and the
dissipated or repressed, while refreshing the atmosphere.

The fishing cat was the first to decide to return to land and leave
return to what remained of the forest. But the porcupines
were still wound up when Kazan and Gray Wolf decided to
leave their asylum.

They walked all the next night, along the bank of the river,
from which they sailed upstream. The ashes were hot and burned
painfully paws. The moon was still red and sinister, and
still seemed a splash of blood in the sky.

During the long hours when the two animals walked side by side,
all was silence around them. Nothing, not even the hooting of a
owl. For, before the great fire, all the birds had fled too,
on the other bank. No signs of life remained on
this land which, just yesterday, constituted, for the wild hosts of the
Wild, a paradise.

Kazan knew that, to find his food and that of Gray Wolf, he
he had to go further, much further.

At dawn, the couple arrived at a place where the river, already less
wide, formed a sort of marsh.

Beavers had built a dike there, thanks to which Kazan and
Gray Wolf were finally able to cross to the opposite bank, where the earth
became green and fertile again.




XIII

PROFESSOR PAUL WEYMAN PHOTOGRAPHY KAZAN AND GRAY WOLF


They trotted, two more days, in the direction of the west. There
country where they now found themselves, called the “Waterfound”, was
extremely wet and swampy. They remained there for the rest of the summer.

In this same region, a mixed race of Indian and French, who
named Henri Loti, had built himself a cabin.

Thin and with heavily colored skin, he was one of the most successful lynx hunters
more famous than there was in all the vast country which borders the Bay
of Hudson. The Waterfound was a land of plenty for game, where
especially the snow-booted rabbits swarmed by the thousands. The lynxes,
to whom they provided abundant pasture, were therefore also
many. Henri Loti had come, in the fall, from one of the Posts of the
Bay, prospect the “signs” of these animals and had built the cabin in
question, about five or six miles from the lodging that Kazan and Louve Grise
had chosen each other.

At the beginning of winter, as soon as the first snow fell, the mongrel was
returned to settle in the cabin with his sleigh, his team of
dogs and his supply of food and traps.

Shortly after, a guide brought him, one fine day, a stranger who had come
ask him for hospitality.

He was a man of thirty-two to thirty-three years old, full of blood and
life, professor of zoology, and who brought together, _in person_, the
materials necessary for an important work that he had undertaken,
entitled: _Reasoning and instinct among wild animals_.

He brought with him a lot of paper, to write down his observations,
a camera and the portrait of a young woman. His only
weapon was a pocket knife.

He seemed, from the first glance, sympathetic to Henri Loti. It was strong
happy. Because the mongrel was, that day, in the mood of a dog. It
explained the cause to his host that same evening, while both
sucked their pipes next to the stove, from which a red glow radiated.

--Odd! odd! said the half-breed. Here are seven lynxes, caught by me
in my traps, which I found completely shredded. It looks like,
nothing more, the remains of a rabbit eaten by foxes. No beast,
not even bears have attacked a lynx in this way until now
capture. This is the first time such an adventure has happened to me. What
The rest of the skin thus trashed is not worth half a dollar. Seven lynxes...
Two hundred dollars lost! These are two wolves who are playing this on me
turn there. Two, always two, and never one. I know it from the
footprints left by them. They follow my line of traps and
devour, in addition, all the rabbits that are caught there. They disdain
the fishing cat, and the mink, and the ermine, and the marten, as having
probably too bad taste. But the lynx, _sacred Devil[20]!_ they
jump on him and pull out his hair, like you would cotton
wild that grows on bushes. I tried strychnine in
reindeer fat. I set steel traps, skillfully
concealed, and tilting hatches, which knock out the dead whoever leaves them
take. They don't care. If I can't get my hands on them,
They will force me to leave here. For five beautiful lynxes I took,
They destroyed seven of them! This cannot continue like this!

  [20] In French in the text.

This story had greatly interested Paul Weyman. He was one of those
thoughtful brains, of which there are more and more, who believe that
racial selfishness blinds man completely to many facts, and
not the least interesting, of creation. He was not afraid of
to proclaim loudly, and he had owed to this daring assertion the
celebrity which he enjoyed throughout Canada, that the man is not
the only living being capable of reasoning its actions and that it can
to have, in the skillful and auspicious act of an animal, something other than
instinct.

He therefore considered that behind the facts reported by Henri Loti, there was
had a hidden reason that would be interesting to discover. And,
until midnight, there was only talk of the two mysterious wolves.

--There is one, said the mongrel, who is bigger than the other, and it is
always the one who engages and leads the fight with the captive lynx.
These are still the footprints marked on the snow which remind me
teach it. During the battle, the smallest wolf stands
distance, and it is only when the lynx is stunned that it arrives
and help the other wolf tear it to pieces. This again, the snow tells me
said clearly. Only once, I was able to see that the little wolf
had also entered into the struggle. This must have been warmer,
because another blood was mixed on the snow with that of the lynx. I have, thanks to
these red spots, followed for a mile the trail of the two devils. Then
she got lost, as usual, in impenetrable thickets.

The next day and the day after that, the zoologist followed with Henri the
line of strikes, and he was able to see in his turn that the prints
were always double.

On the third day, the two men arrived at a trap where a beautiful lynx
was taken by the paw. We could still see the place where the smallest
wolf sat in the snow, on his behind, waiting for his
companion would have killed the lynx. At the sight of what remained of the animal,
whose fur was completely shredded and no longer had any
value, the face of the mongrel turned red and he disguised his entire repertoire
of swear words, English and French.

As for Paul Weyman, without saying much to his companion, so as not to
point to irritate him more, more and more he convinced himself that behind
There was a hidden reason for this abnormal act. Why the two beasts
were they only targeting lynx? Of what deadly hatred
Was that the clue?

Paul Weyman felt singularly moved. He loved all these beings
savages and, for this reason, never took a gun with him.
When he saw the half-breed placing the two marauders on the trail of the
poisoned bait, his heart sank. And when, in the following days,
the bait was found intact, he felt great joy.
Something in him sympathized with the heroic unknown outlaws,
who never failed to give battle to the lynx.

Back in the cabin, the zoologist did not fail to sleep
wrote down his observations of the day and the deductions he drew from them.

One evening, turning to Henri Loti, he asked him point-blank:

--Tell me, Henri, do you never feel any remorse for massacring so much
animals that you do it?

The half-breed looked at him, eye to eye, and nodded.

--I have, in fact, he said, killed thousands and thousands in my life.
thousands. And I will kill thousands more, without leaving
otherwise disturb.

--There are many people like you in the Wild, Paul Weyman continued.
There have been for centuries. Like you, they carry out the work of
dead; they wage what could be called the war of Man and
the beast. They have not yet, thank heaven, succeeded everywhere in destroying
wildlife. Thousands of square miles of mountain ranges,
marshes and forests remain inaccessible to civilization. THE
the same tracks are traced there, for eternity perhaps. I say
perhaps... Because, in the middle of the desert, today there are villages and
cities. Have you heard of North Battleford?

--Is it near Montreal or Quebec? asked Henri.

Weyman smiled and took a photograph from his pocket. It was the portrait
of a young woman.

--No, he replied. It's much further west, in Saskatchewan.
Seven years ago, I went away regularly, every year,
during hunting season, shoot prairie chickens,
coyotes[21] and elk. There was no North there at that time
Battleford. Over hundreds of square miles, nothing but the superb
meadow. A hut, just one, stood on the banks of the Saskatchewan River,
precisely where North Battleford stands today. It is in this
hut that I resided in. A pretty twelve-year-old girl lived there with
his father and his mother. When I was hunting, the little girl often came
with me. When I killed, she sometimes cried, and I laughed
from her... Then a railway appeared, and then another. THE
two railway tracks met, precisely, near the hut.
Then, suddenly, a small town sprung up. Seven years ago you
understand me well, Henri, nothing but the hut. Two years ago, the city
already had eighteen hundred inhabitants. This year, I found, in
crossing to come here, that she had five thousand. In two years,
there will be ten thousand...

  [21] Coyotes, or prairie wolves, are a species of small
    wolf, which is both a fox and a wolf.

Paul Weyman took a drag from his pipe, then continued:

--On the site of the hut, there are three banks, with capital
each of forty million dollars. In the evening, twenty miles to the
round, we can see the glow of the electric lamps of North Battleford.
The town has a college, which cost one hundred thousand dollars, a school
Secondary school, a provincial asylum, a superb fire station, two
bells, a Ministry of Labor and, before long, electric trams
will work there. Think about that! There, yes, where coyotes howled, there
is seven years old... The influx of the population is such that the last
census is always late. In five years, I tell you, it will be
a city of twenty thousand souls! And the little girl from the cabin, Henri,
is today a charming young girl, who is almost twenty years old. His
parents... Eh! my God, yes! his parents are rich. But the main thing
is that we are to get married next spring. To please him,
I stopped killing any living being. The last beast I slaughtered
was a prairie wolf. She had little ones. Hélène kept
one of the cubs. She raised and tamed him. This is why, more
that all the beasts of the Wild, I love the wolves. And I hope that the
two of whom we speak will escape your snares and your poison.

Henri Loti, the half-breed, looked, completely amazed, at Paul Weyman. This one
handed him the portrait. It was that of a young girl, with a sweet face,
with deep and pure eyes. The professor saw his forehead wrinkle and
pursing the lips of the half-breed, who was examining the image.

--Me too, he said with emotion, I liked it. My Iowoka, my Indian,
died three years ago now. She also loved animals
wild... But the damned wolves, who carve up all my lynxes,
I will have their skin, by heaven! If I don't kill them, it's them who
will kick me out of this cabin.

Constantly attached to this idea, Henri Loti, one day noticing a
recent lynx track, noticed that it passed under a large tree
overturned, whose main branches supported the trunk at ten or
fifteen feet from the ground, thus forming a sort of inextricable cavern. There
snow, all around, was beaten with the trampling of paws and the hairs
of a rabbit were scattered there.

The half-breed rubbed his hands and gloated.

--I will have the lynx! he said. And the wolves with him!

He began, without delay, to establish his trap.

Under the fallen tree, he began by installing a first steel trap,
held by a chain to a large branch. Then, around it,
in a circle of about ten feet, he set five smaller traps,
also connected by chains to other branches. Finally, he
placed a bait on the big trap, after having concealed it, as well as the
others, using moss and branches.

--The biggest trap and its bait, he explained to Paul Weyman, are
intended for lynx. Those around him are for the wolves. When the
lynx will be taken and they will come to fight him, it will be the
damn if they don't get caught by one of them.

Gray Wolf and Kazan, during the following night, grew to a hundred
steps from the overturned tree. Gray Wolf's penetrating sense of smell seizes
immediately in the air the smell of the man, which must have circulated there.
She communicated her apprehension to Kazan, pressing harder
shoulder against his. They both turned around and, while
now in the wind, fled from the suspicious place.

The next day, a light auspicious snow fell, covering the footprints
of man and his smell.

For three more days and three more freezing nights, bathed in the
starlight, nothing happened. Henri was not worried about it. He
explained to the professor that the lynx was also a hunter
methodical, no doubt busy following and exploring the avenues that
himself had noted during the previous week.

On the fifth day, the lynx returned to the fallen tree and
went straight towards the bait, which he saw in the house of branches. THE
trap with sharp teeth closed, inexorable, on one of the legs of
behind the animal.

Kazan and Gray Wolf, who were walking a quarter of a mile away, perceived the
sound of steel relaxing and the clicking of the chain on
which, while trying to free itself, pulled the lynx. They arrived, ten
minutes later.

The night was so clear and pure, it was so teeming
of stars that Henry himself could have set out to hunt for their brightness.

The lynx, exhausted from the efforts he had made, lay on his stomach
when Kazan and Gray Wolf, penetrating under the tree, appeared in front
him. Kazan, as usual, engaged in battle, while Louve
Grise stood a little behind.

The lynx was an old warrior, six or seven years old, in full force
and in all its weight. Its claws, an inch long, curled
like scimitars. If Kazan had met him in freedom, he would have,
without a doubt, it was a bad quarter of an hour. Even taken by the paw,
the enormous cat was still a formidable opponent. The place of the fight,
too narrow for Kazan, whose movements were hampered, he
was also unfavorable.

The lynx, at the sight of him, drew back with its chain and its trap, in order to
take the field. We had to attack head on. This is what Kazan did.
Suddenly he jumped and the two adversaries met, shoulder
against shoulder.

The wolfdog's fangs tried to grab the lynx by the throat and
missed their shot. Before they could renew it, the lynx, in
a furious effort, managed to tear his hind leg from the
steel pincers. Gray Wolf could hear the horrible tearing of the
flesh and muscles. With an angry growl, Kazan threw himself back
sharply backward, the shoulder already lacerated to the bone.

At this moment, his good genius wanted a second trap to come into play, the
thus saving from a new attack by the lynx and certain death. THE
steel jaws closed on one of the front legs of the big one
cat and Kazan could breathe.

Understanding, without seeing it, the great danger his companion was running, whose
she had heard the moan of pain, the blind wolf had,
in order to help him, in turn sneaking under the tree.

She jumped towards the lynx and immediately fell on a third trap,
who grabbed her roughly and pushed her to the side, biting and
growling.

Kazan, who had returned to the fight and was struggling around the lynx, said
soon the fourth trap was triggered, from which he escaped, then the
fifth who grabbed him by one of his hind legs. He was then a
a little after midnight.

It was, until the morning, in the cave of branches, on the earth
snowy, a chaos of struggles and howls, of the she-wolf, of the
wolfdog and lynx, each of which was trying to free itself from the trap
and the chain to which they were riveted.

When dawn broke, all three could stand no more and went to bed
on the side, panting, with bloody jaws, waiting for the arrival of
man and death.

Henri Loti and Paul Weyman had gotten up early. Approaching
from the fallen tree, the mongrel noted on the snow the double footprints of
Gray and Kazan Wolf, and her tinted face, all quivering
of emotion, lit up with intense joy.

When the two men arrived at the treacherous cave, they
remained taken aback for a moment. Henri himself had not expected
such a perfect success and never before had he seen such a spectacle:
two wolves and a lynx, taken as companions, all three by the paw, and
each shod to their own chain.

But quickly the hunter's instinct took over in Henri. THE
two wolves were closest to him and he was already raising his rifle,
to support and send a good metal bullet into the brains of
Kazan.

No less quickly, Paul Weyman grabbed him strongly by the arm. He
seemed completely amazed.

--Wait, Henri, don't shoot! he shouted. This one is not a wolf.
Look instead! He wore a necklace. The hair is not completely
pushed back on his skinned neck. It's a dog!

The half-breed lowered his weapon and looked carefully.

Meanwhile, the zoologist's gaze had returned to Louve
Grise, who faced him, growling and baring his fangs, and
threatening with their bite the enemy she could not see. There where
should have been his eyes, there was only skin, half covered
of hair. An exclamation escaped Weyman's lips.

--Look at! Look, Henry! Just Heaven, what is this!

--One is a dog, who joined the wolves and returned to the state
savage. The other is indeed a wolf, or rather a she-wolf...

--And blind! said, with an intonation of pity, Paul Weyman.

--_Yes, sir!_ Blind! replied the half-blood, mixing in his
surprisingly, French to English.

He straightened his rifle again. Weyman intervened again.

--Don't kill them, Henri! You're welcome. Give them to me, alive. Do
the estimation of the value of the lynx whose skin they have damaged. Add
to this sum the usual bounty paid for wolves. I will pay the
All. Alive, these two beasts are invaluable to me. A
dog and a blind wolf who made a home together! It is
wonderful, just think!

He still held Henri's rifle in his hand. Henri did not understand
not very sure what his interlocutor said and thought, apart from
him, that he was a little crazy.

But the zoologist grew more and more animated, his eyes blazed.

--A dog and a blind wolf, together! It's super-rare and very
admirable fact! Over there in the city they will say, reading this in
my book, that I invented, or that I am crazy. But I will provide the
evidence. Right here, and right away, I'm going to take a series of photos
of the astonishing spectacle that is before us. Then you will kill the lynx.
But I will keep the dog and the she-wolf alive. And I will pay you, Henri,
one hundred dollars for each of them. Is it said?

The half-breed nodded his head.

Immediately, the professor took his device out of the case
photographic camera and operated the joysticks, set up the viewfinder.

A concert of grunts, from the she-wolf and the lynx, greeted the click
of the shutter. Only Kazan did not show his fangs. And, if he
contracted his muscles, it was not because he was afraid, but because
that he recognized, once again, the superior domination of
the man.

When he had taken his twenty plates, Paul Weyman approached the
wolfdog and gently spoke to him. So softly that Kazan thought he heard
the voice of the man and woman from the abandoned cabin.

After which, Henry fired a shot at the lynx, and Kazan, shaking
his chain and biting it, growled fiercely at his enemy,
whose body convulsed in agony.

The two men then placed a strong strap around the neck of
Kazan and freed him from the trap. The wolfdog gave in and they
took him to the cabin. They returned, shortly afterwards, with a triple
thong, and did the same with the blind wolf. She was at this
so exhausted and without strength that she did not resist either.

The rest of the day was spent, by Henri and Weyman, at the
construction of a large and strong cage, which they made with
trunks of young fir trees, as bars. When it was finished
They locked the two prisoners there.

Two days later, while the mongrel had gone to set his traps, Paul
Weyman, left alone at the cabin, risked passing his hand through the
bars of the cage and to caress Kazan, who let him do so. The day
According to him, he offered the wolf dog a piece of raw elk meat, which
was accepted.

But it was not the same with Gray Wolf. As soon as she felt
approach the zoologist, she ran to hide under bundles of
cut branches, which had been given to him in the cage to sleep.
Wild instinct had taught him that man was his deadliest
enemy.

This man, however, was not threatening towards her. He doesn't
did no harm and Kazan had no fear of it. Also his first
fear soon gave way to curiosity and a sort of attraction
increasing. She ends up getting her blind head out from under the fagots
and to sniff the air towards Weyman, when the latter, standing in front of the
cage, strove to win the good graces and friendship of
Kazan.

However, she refused to eat anything. In vain, Weyman
tried to tempt her with choice pieces of elk fat or
reindeer. Five, six, seven days passed without her consenting to
absorb a single bite. On this diet, she lost weight day by day.
day, and we began to be able to count his ribs.

--The beast is going to die, said Henri Loti to his companion, on the evening of the seventh
day. She will starve herself to death. To live, he needs
forest, wild prey and hot blood. She already has two or three
years. It's too old to be civilized.

Having thus spoken, the half-breed went quietly to bed, leaving
Weyman very disturbed.

Weyman stayed up late that night. He first wrote a long letter to
the sweet-faced girl from North Battleford. Then he blew
lamp and, in the red glow of the stove, he painted himself a thousand
delicious visions.

He saw her as he had met her, for the first time, in
the small isolated hut in Saskatchewan, having on its back a large
shiny braid and on her cheeks all the freshness of the meadows.

For a long time she had hated him, yes, truly hated him, for the pleasure he
took to kill. Then, his influence had completely transformed him and
today he was deeply grateful to her.

He got up and gently opened the cabin door. Instinctively,
his eyes turned towards the side of the sky where North was in the distance
Battleford. The sky was ablaze with stars and, in their brightness, he saw
the cage where Kazan and Gray Wolf were prisoners.

He listened. A noise reached him. It was Gray Wolf who was gnawing
silence the bars of his prison. Soon after, he heard a moan
stifled, almost like a sob, It was Kazan who cried his
freedom lost.

An ax was leaning against one of the walls of the cabin. Weyman leaves
grabs and smiles mutely. He thought that another soul, a thousand
miles away, looked at him at that moment and beat in unison with his
gesture.

Having advanced towards the cage, he raised the steel ax. A dozen of
blows, well applied, and two of the pine bars gave way. Then he
stood back.

Gray Wolf, the first, came towards the opening and, under the light of the
stars, slipped outside, like a shadow.

But she did not immediately flee. In the clearing where
the hut stood, she waited for Kazan.

Kazan was not long in joining her and, for a moment, the two beasts
remained there, without moving, a little surprised. Finally, they
trotted away, Gray Wolf's shoulder against her side.
Kazan.

--Two by two... murmured Weyman. United always, until death.




XIV

THE RED DEATH[22]

  [22] In French in the text.


Kazan and Gray Wolf ran for a long time in the direction of the north and
arrived at the region called _Fond-du-Lac_[23].

  [23] In French in the text.

This is where they were when _Jacques_[24], messenger of the
Hudson's Bay Company[25] came to bring to the posts of the region
the first authentic news of the terrible scourge: an epidemic
of smallpox, which was rife in the Wild.

  [24] In French in the text.

  [25] Hudson's Bay Company
    maintains throughout Northland, and even in the regions
    Arctic, posts and factories.

For several weeks, rumors had been circulating,
different sides. Then these rumors grew. From the east, from
south and west, they had multiplied to such an extent that everywhere,
in the vast solitudes, travelers announced that _Death
Rouge_, the _Red Terror_[26] was on their heels. And the thrill of
immense fear passed, like a violent wind, from the last regions
civilized at the farthest ends of the Great White Desert.

  [26] The Red Terror.

Nineteen years earlier, these same rumors had already spread and the
Red Terror followed. The horror still remained among all the
people of the Wild, because thousands of graves without crosses, which we fled like
a pestilence, and which spread from James Bay to Lake Athabasca,
bore witness to the toll that the scourge demanded on its path[27].

  [27] _James Bay_, or James Bay, forms the southernmost trough
    of Hudson Bay. Lake Athabasca is located a thousand
    kilometers northwest, between the 60th degree and the Arctic Circle.
    The region is located on the north shore of the Athabasca.
    called Fond-du-Lac.

Often, in their wandering errands, Kazan and Gray Wolf had
encountered these little funeral mounds, and a mysterious instinct, which
went beyond human understanding, told them, without the help of any
meaning, that death was underneath. Maybe too, especially Louve
Grey, whose blindness made him more sensitive to the scents of the air and the
ground, they directly perceived what eyes could not see.

Still, it was Gray Wolf who discerned the first, the
presence of the Red Terror.

In his company, Kazan was exploring a line of traps, which he had just
discover. The trail that had brought him there was old. Nobody, since
quite a large number of days had passed there. In a first
trap, sheltered by thick fir trees, they found a rabbit half
putrefied. In another was a fox carcass, scrubbed thoroughly
by an owl, which had left some feathers behind. The major
part of the traps were relaxed. Others were covered with
snow. In vain Kazan searched from trap to trap, in order to find a
live game to devour.

Beside him, the blind wolf felt Death present. She has it
felt a shiver in the air, above her, on the peaks of the
fir trees. She discovered it in each of the traps that she and Kazan
met. Death, that of man, was everywhere. And, as
as they went, she moaned more, biting the side of
Kazan, who was still trotting forward.

The two thus arrived at a clearing, where a cabin stood.
This cabin was that of Otto, the fur hunter.

Gray Wolf stopped in front and, sitting on her behind, looked up
the gray sky its blind face. Then she uttered a long complaint. SO
Kazan's hairs began to stand up all along his
spine. He sat down in his turn and added his howl to that of Gray Wolf.
to death.

Death was indeed in the cabin. At the top of it stood
a pole, made of a young fir tree, at the end of which floated a
strip of red cotton. It was the warning flag of Death
Red, which, from James Bay to Lake Athabasca, everyone knew
clearly the meaning.

Trapper Otto, like hundreds of other Northland heroes, before
to lie down to die, had displayed the fatal signal.

That same night, under the cold light of the moon, Kazan and Gray Wolf
resumed their course and moved away from the cabin.

From factory to factory passed the funeral messengers of death.
One of them, who came from Lac du Renne and had gone along the Lake
Wollaston[28] arrived, crossing Lake Athabasca on the ice, at
Fond-du-Lac post.

  [28] Lac du Renne and Lac Wollaston are located south of Lac du Renne
    Athabasca, as well as Forts Albany and Churchill.

--The Red Death, he said, has contaminated the Indians, too, since
the residents of Hudson Bay to the Crees and the Chippewas,
between Forts Albany and Churchill. But, I go further, towards
the west, carry the news.

Three days later, a second messenger arrived from Fort Churchill,
bearer of an official letter from the principal agent, warning the
people of the Fond-du-Lac Post that they had to prepare without delay,
for the Red Death.

The man who received the letter became, as he read it, paler than the
paper he held between his fingers.

--This, he said, means that we must dig graves! Those are the
the only useful preparations there are to make!

He read the letter aloud and all the able-bodied men were designated
to go and warn, on the territory of the Post, all the comrades
scattered in the forests.

We hastened to harness the dogs. On each sleigh that left, we
placed in addition to the usual medicines, a roll of red cotton,
of which the lugubrious signals of pestilence and horror would be made, and
which sent violent shivers into the hands of the men who
were charging.

Gray Wolf and Kazan came across the track of one of these sleds, on
the ice of the Gray Castor River, and both followed it for a
half a mile. The next day, they came across a second lead, and,
two days later, on a third.

This one was very recent and Gray Wolf growled louder, her fangs
uncovered, as if an invisible object had stung her. At the same time,
the wind brought the couple an acrid smell of smoke.

Kazan and Gray Wolf climbed onto a nearby mound. They saw
from there, below them, a burning cabin, while a sleigh
team of dogs disappeared among the fir trees, with the man who
was driving. In the cabin there was another man, dead of the terrible
scourge, and which blazed with her. This was the law of the North.

In front of the funeral pyre Gray Wolf remained more rigid than a rock,
while a moan rolled down Kazan's throat, Then, suddenly,
they fled, as if they themselves had set fire to the
behind, and only stopped ten miles beyond, on a swamp
frozen, where they buried themselves in the thick and thick vegetation which
covered.

The days and weeks that followed completed the winter of
1910 as one of the most terrible in the history of Northland. There
Red Terror, the cold and the famine made the
scale of death, both for wild beasts and for humans,
that this chapter will never be forgotten, even for generations to come.

Kazan and Gray Wolf had found a home among the marsh
comfortable in the hollow trunk of a fallen tree. It was a little nest
made to perfection, and well sheltered from snow and wind. Gray Wolf, who
discovered it, took possession of it first and spread itself out on its
stomach, panting with satisfaction. Kazan entered after her.

They continued to live on white rabbits and partridges of
fir trees. Kazan surprised the partridges when these birds landed on
floor. He jumped on them before they heard him
approach.

Gray Wolf had ceased to be distressed by her blindness, to rub her
eyes with its paws and whine for the sunlight, for
that of the golden moon and the stars. His hearing and sense of smell
were becoming more and more refined. She could feel, in the wind, a
caribou two miles away and, at a greater distance, guess
the presence of a man. On a calm night, she heard the lapping
of a trout in a stream, half a mile away.

His help had become invaluable to his companion while hunting.
It was she who smelled the game and indicated its presence in Kazan
who, on this point, now relied entirely on her. She
had also tried, despite his blindness, to pursue the
animals that she raised. But still she had failed.

The special circumstances in which they both found themselves had
mated no longer, only for the mating season, but for
always. While Kazan, in his hunts, could no longer do without
of Gray Wolf, Gray Wolf had easily deduced from her blindness that
without Kazan it would perish.

Her companion, for her, meant life. So she never stopped
caress and take care of it. If Kazan growled at her, in a
fit of temper, she did not respond with a bite, but
humbly lowered his head. With her warm tongue, she melted the
ice which, when he returned, had formed under the hairs, between the
claws of Kazan.

One day when a splinter of wood stuck into the sole of one of the
her paws, she kept licking the wound, to make it bleed
and pull out the painful splinter. Always, when they were at
rest, she placed her beautiful blind head on the back or on the neck of
Kazan.

Small game abounded around them and it was warm in the trunk
of the tree. Rarely did they venture, even to hunt, outside the
limits of the hospital marsh. All there, sometimes, in the vast
plains and on distant ridges, they clearly heard the cry of
hunting wolves, on the trail of meat. But they didn't shiver
no longer to the call of the horde and the desire to join them was no longer in
them.

As one day, they had pushed their course a little further than
usually, they crossed a plain on which a fire had
past, the previous summer, climbed on a ridge which was in front
them, then went back down to a second plain.

There, Gray Wolf stopped, to smell the air. Kazan observed him, attentive and
nervous, for a few moments, as he was wont to do. But,
almost immediately, he understood why Louve's erect ears
Grise fell back suddenly and he himself felt his
rear axle. It was not game that was close. It was
another smell, that of man, which had hit their nostrils.

The two animals seemed to hesitate for a few minutes. Gray Wolf
had come to stand behind Kazan, as if under his protection, and
complained. Kazan led the way.

At a distance of less than three hundred yards they came to a
grove of small fir trees and found there a “tepee”[29] buried almost
entirely under the snow.

  [29] Indian hut.

He was abandoned. Life and fire were gone. It is
that the smell of man came from.

With stiff legs and quivering fur, Kazan approached the opening
of the teepee. He looked inwardly. In the center of the cabin, on the
charred ashes from a fire, lay wrapped in a blanket
half consumed, the body of a small Indian child. Kazan could see the
tiny feet, shod in tiny moccasins. The body was like
dried up and the sense of smell could barely detect its presence.

Kazan stuck his head out of the tepee and saw, behind him, the blind wolf
who walked his nose around an elongated mound, whose strange shape
was still visible under the snow. She went around it three times, with
distrust, then sat on his behind, some distance away.

In turn, Kazan approached the pile and sniffed. In this form which
bulging in the snow, just as in the tepee, was death. The scourge
red had come this far.

With tails low and ears flattened, the couple moved away, crawling
on his stomach, until the grove of fir trees had disappeared. Kazan
and Gray Wolf only stopped at their “home” in the marsh.

During the following night, the full moon appeared to them in the aspect
of a pale disc, the edge of which was surrounded by a crimson circle.
It was a sign of cold, intense cold.

The Red Death always went hand in hand with extreme cold. And more
temperature fell, the more the ravages of the epidemic were
terrible.

Throughout the night, the cold only increased. He penetrated until
heart of the tree where Kazan and Gray Wolf were lying, and made them settle down
more closely against each other.

At dawn, which appeared around eight o'clock in the morning, the two beasts
risked coming out of retirement. A thermometer would have marked
fifty degrees below zero. In the branches of the fir trees, the partridges
were curled up on themselves, in balls of feathers, and they
were careful not to go down to the ground. Snow Booted Rabbits
remained buried deep in their burrows.

Kazan and Gray Wolf were unable to pick up any leads and after a
half an hour of a fruitless hunt, returned to their tree.

Two or three days before, Kazan had buried under the snow, as people do
often dogs, half of an unfinished rabbit. He dug it up and
shared the frozen flesh with Gray Wolf.

The thermometer, during the day, continued to fall. The night that
followed was clear and cloudless, with a white moon, like a
electric globe, and myriads of brilliant stars. Temperature
fell another ten degrees and, in nature, everything finished
to stand still. Even fur-bearing animals, mink, ermine and lynx
himself, never left their shelters during the nights
similar, and the trappers always found, the next day, all
their traps intact.

The hunger they felt was still insufficient to pull Louve
Grise and Kazan from their retirement. They remained, until the day,
hot in their tree, and did well. Because they would not have met
outside the slightest critter.

The day appeared, without any change in the dreadful cold which
was rampant. Around noon, Kazan, leaving Gray Wolf in the tree,
decided to go hunting alone.

The three quarters of dog he had in his blood gave him back the
food more necessary than for his companion. To this one, on the contrary,
like all its wolf brothers, provident nature had given a
stomach capable of supporting starvation. Normally, she
could easily go a fortnight without eating. By sixty
degrees below zero, while the loss of strength is more rapid,
she could still fast for eight or ten days. Gold thirty
only hours had passed since she finished the
last piece of the frozen rabbit, and she preferred to stay in her warm
retirement.

So Kazan, who was hungry, began to beat all the bushes,
search all the thickets. Light snow, almost sleet, in small quantities
grains, had fallen and he discovered only one track, that of a
ermine, which he could not reach.

Under a dead tree, at the opening of a burrow, he will smell the good smell
of a rabbit. But the rabbit was as safe at the bottom of his hole as
partridges on the branches of trees. After an hour spent
scratching the frozen ground and trying in vain to dig it with their claws,
Kazan gave up the game.

When he returned to Louve Grise, after three hours of hunting, he
was at the end of his strength. While his companion, with the wise instinct of
conservation of the Wild that was in her, had spared her energy
vital. Kazan had spent himself unnecessarily and was hungrier than
Never.

When night had returned and the moon returned to the sky, clear and
brilliant, Kazan started hunting again. By little moans and by
false starts, followed by retracing his steps, he had tried again
to drag Gray Wolf with him. But, the ears obliquely
folded towards his blind eyes, she persisted no less tenaciously in
do not move.

The temperature was still plummeting. She reached in the
sixty-five to seventy degrees, aggravated by a cutting wind and
increasingly violent, which was the result. A human being who
would have tried to stand outside and fallen dead.

At midnight, Kazan had to give up, once again, and return to his lodge.

The whirlwinds of the wind became more brutal and, climbing on his
dead tree, Kazan burst into funeral groans, in bursts, alternating
of silences, of a piercing and fierce song, which resounded in the distance.
It was the precursor of the northern hurricane which, from the Arctic,
was running towards the great Barrens.

With the dawn, it was unleashed in all its fury. Kazan and Gray Wolf
pressed together, shivering in the infernal din.
Kazan, for a moment, tried to venture out with his head and shoulders, he
was pushed back.

All the animals of the Wild, everything that had life there, lurks
even more in its refuges. The fur-bearing animals were those
who had the least to fear from the violence and the duration of this
atmospheric cataclysm. Because at the bottom of their dens they pile up
carefully store food during the summer.

The wolves and foxes were huddled under the overturned trees or
in the caves of the rocks. The winged things sheltered themselves so well
that badly in the branches of fir trees where small silos were dug in
the snow dunes, on the side opposite the wind. The owls, which are all in
feathers, of all the birds were those which suffered the least
cold.

But it was for the big beasts with horns and hooves that the hurricane
of the North was the most calamitous.

Reindeer, caribou and elk could not, given their size,
slide through the cracks of the rocks. The best they could do, when they
were surprised in the open plain, was to lie down in the lee of
some snowy dune, and let yourself be completely covered by the
white flakes and their protective shell.

But still they could not remain long in the shelter of this
voluntary burial. Because they had to eat. Six p.m
during, out of twenty-four, the jaws of the elk must work,
during the winter, so that he does not die of hunger. His vast stomach
demands quantity and must devour without respite; it's two or three
bushels of daily food that he needs. And the work is
long to nibble at the top of the bushes, a similar cube of twigs and
still tender shoots. Caribou demand almost as much. Reindeer
is, of the three, the least difficult to satisfy.

For three days and three nights, the hurricane raged. During the
third night, the wind was accompanied by heavy snow, which
covered the ground with a thickness of two feet and piled up in enormous
dunes. It was what the Indians call "heavy snow",
that is to say the snow which, over creation, extends like a screed of
lead, and under which rabbits and small creatures suffocate
thousands.

On the fourth day, Kazan and Gray Wolf ventured out of their
lodging. The wind had stopped and the snow was no longer falling. A white shroud,
immense, infinite, covered the entire world of Northland. The cold was
always intense.

As the Red Death had accomplished its ravages on men, the days
of famine, which would decimate them, had now arrived for the
wild animals.




XV

THE HUNGER TRAIL


It had been a hundred and forty hours since Kazan and Gray Wolf had
eat. This prolonged fast resulted in discomfort in the she-wolf.
growing and sharp pain in the stomach. For Kazan, it was
almost complete starvation. Their ribs, both of them, protruded
their sides hollowed out, and their hindquarters seemed to have shrunk. THE
Kazan's eyes were bloodshot and blinking, in the
narrow slit of the eyelids when he looked at the light.

Gray Wolf, this time, did not need to be asked to follow Kazan,
when he went hunting on the bare snow.

Impatient and full of hope, the couple first went to visit a
part of the marsh where white rabbits were usually common.
They found no trace of it, no smell. They returned to their
not, by describing a horseshoe, but whatever their flair takes them
pointed out was an owl, perched high on a fir tree.

They left, disappointed, in a direction opposite to that of the marsh and
climbed a rocky ridge, which they encountered. From the top, they
questioned the horizon, but discovered nothing other than a world
without life.

Vainly Gray Wolf sniffed the air, from right and left. As for
Kazan, his ascent had left him so out of breath that he was panting, the
tongue hanging out. Returning empty-handed to the lodge, he tripped over a
insignificant obstacle, which he had tried to leap over. Her
weakness and that of Gray Wolf only increased, as did
their hunger.

During the night, which was bright and pure, they began to
search the swamp. The only creature they heard moving was a
fox. But they knew too well that it was futile to hope for
win the race.

Suddenly, the thought of the abandoned cabin of Otto, the hunter of
furs, came to Kazan. In his brain, cabin had always been
synonymous with warmth and nourishment. He did not think that the cabin
enclosed death and that in front of it, he and Gray Wolf had thrown the
funeral howl. And he took off, straight in that direction. The wolf
blind followed him.

Along the way, Kazan continued to hunt; but without conviction. He
seemed discouraged. The food that the cabin was supposed to contain was
his last hope.

Gray Wolf, on the contrary, remained alert and vigilant. Non-stop
she ran her nose over the snow and sniffed the air.

The long-desired smell finally came. She stopped, and Kazan did the same.
Tensing his depressed muscles, he looked at her who, with her front paws
planted in the snow, dilated its nostrils, not in the direction of
the cabin, but further east. The wolf's whole body quivered and
was trembling.

An imperceptible and still distant noise reached them and they
took their course in this direction. The smell grew stronger as
as they moved forward. It was not that of a rabbit or a partridge.
It was that of a big game. They started to go more
cautiously.

The place was wooded. But, if they couldn't see anything, now
they clearly heard a crash of horns crossing each other and
collided with each other, in a great clash of battle.

They soon came to a clearing and Kazan suddenly flattened out.
on his stomach. Gray Wolf did as he did.

In the middle of the clearing, all the young shoots of which had been
grazed, all the bushes razed, there was an assembly of elk. There's
had a total of six animals, three females, a one-year-old calf, and two
males. The two males were engaged in a formidable duel and the three
females watched.

The younger of the two males, barely adult, robust bull with hair
shining, in all the strength of his four years, wore on his head a
compact antler, which had not reached its full development,
but which gained in robustness and acuity what it did not have
still in scale. He had, during the hurricane of past days, brought
his herd, of which he was the leader, the three females and the calf of one
year, under the auspicious shelter of the fir forest.

There, the second male, older, came to join him during the night,
also chased by the hurricane. And, shamelessly, the intruder had
attempted, near the females, to encroach on the domain of its host.

The old bull, four times older than the young one, weighed twice
like him. Its massive and formidable horns, irregular, webbed and
gnarled, said its age. He was an accomplished warrior, who had taken
takes part in a hundred battles. So he did not hesitate to give battle to
his young adversary, in order to steal his family and his home.

Three times already since dawn, the two adversaries had fought.
The crushed snow around them was red with blood. And the smell of this blood
arrived deliciously at the nostrils of Kazan and Gray Wolf, who
sniffed ardently. Strange noises rolled in their throats, and
they licked their jaws.

The two fighters were there, their foreheads lowered, head to head. THE
old momentum had not yet won its victory. He had art on his side
of war, its greater weight, its more mature strength, its immense
antler. The cadet possessed youth and endurance. Its sides do not
were not panting like those of the old elk, whose
nostrils, which opened like the interior hollow of two large
doorbells.

Then, as if some invisible spirit had given the signal, the
two beasts retreated into the arena, to gain some ground, and the
fight started again.

The old elk's eighteen hundred pounds of flesh and bone rushed forward,
a wink at his young adversary who, no less quickly,
raised into the air and, for the twentieth time, the horns crossed. We
could, half a mile away, have heard the clash of the woods
powerful and the cracks that followed.

While the old male's strength seemed to diminish, it seemed as if
those of the young elk grew with the struggle. Understanding that the
The battle was nearing its conclusion, he committed himself fully, and redoubled his efforts.
vigor and effort.

Kazan and Gray Wolf suddenly heard a sharp noise, something
like the crack of a stick being broken on one's knee. We were
then in February, the time when horned animals begin to
strip their antlers, which the old males lose first.
This circumstance decided the victory.

One of the old elk's enormous antlers had become dislocated from its skull and
had fallen on the bloody arena. The next moment, four inches,
four inches of a stiletto-sharp horn stuck into his
shoulder. Panic seized him and he abandoned all hope of victory. He
began to move backwards step by step, balancing on its legs, while the
victor impetuously continued to lard his neck and shoulders,
from which small streams of blood gushed.

He finally managed to free himself and, turning around, took off at triple speed.
gallop, through the forest. The young elk watched him flee and did not
did not continue. He stood for a few moments shaking his head,
panting flanks and dilated nostrils. Then he returned,
trotting, towards the females and towards the little one, who, all this time,
had not moved.

Of the winner and his family Kazan and Gray Wolf, all shivering,
didn't care. From their hiding place, they had seen in front of them, on the
battlefield, bleeding meat, and a burning desire took hold
of them, to taste them. They slipped back and joined, mad with
gluttony, the red trail that the old moose had left behind
him.

Forgetting Gray Wolf, so much lust and hunger
were gripping the entrails, Kazan was the first to rush onto this
track, slobbering jaws, a current of fire in his veins, and the
blazing eyes, which popped out of his head.

But Gray Wolf didn't need him to lead her. The nose at
level with the bloody trail, she ran, ran, ran, following
Kazan, as fast as if his eyes had not been back to the
light.

After about half a mile they reached the old bull. He
had stopped behind a bouquet of balsam trees and remained there, standing,
motionless, in the middle of a pool of blood which was widening in the snow.

His sides, rising and falling, continued to pant. Her head
massive, grotesque with its single horn, collapsed on itself. His
nostrils were bleeding. But he remained, exhausted as he was, powerful
again and a pack of wolves would, under ordinary circumstances,
hesitated to attack him.

Kazan did not hesitate. He jumped up, with a ferocious growl, and planted
his teeth in the thick skin of the colossus' throat. Then he fell again
on the ground and he stepped back about twenty steps, to renew
immediately his attack.

The old moose, this time, succeeds in removing it from the broad leaf
webbed with its single horn and, making it dance in the air, threw it back
back, over his head, half stunned.

But Gray Wolf had, as always, come to the rescue. She
had crawled towards the hindquarters of the old moose and, despite his
blindness, had managed to grab hold of its fangs, sharp as
knives, the tendon of one of their enemy's legs.

The monster, struggling, tried to make her let go, by
shaking and stomping her on the ground. But she held on. Kazan, during
this time, attacked from the flank and when finally the old momentum had managed to
to clear, it was to admit defeat in this second fight and attempt a
new retirement.

Kazan and Gray Wolf, without risking themselves needlessly, followed suit
step behind him. He could barely drag himself. From his hip
torn and blood flowed from his throat. And, on his left paw,
whose tendon Gray Wolf had cut, he limped horribly.

After a quarter of an hour he stopped again. He painfully raised
his heavy head and looked around him. Then he left her
fall back. He was no longer the proud lord of the vast solitudes, during
twenty years invincible. His whole body was sagging, and the challenge had
disappeared into his dull eyes.

His breathing was nothing more than a loud, ragged rattle. The stylus of
young elk had penetrated up to the lungs. This, a bit of a hunter
experienced would have immediately understood it and Louve Grise, neither,
didn't ignore it. Along with Kazan, she began to walk in circles
around the former king of the Wild, waiting for the moment when he
would collapse.

This moment, however, was not immediate. Once, twice, ten times,
twenty times, the starving couple described their eager circle, in the center
from which the old bull pivoted on itself, following with its gaze the
two beasts.

At midday, the ride was still going on. The twenty towers had become, under
the paws of Gray Wolf and Kazan, a hundred, two hundred, and more.
By the effect of the cold, growing with the decline of the sun, the track
circular, traced and beaten without pause by the eight legs of the
wolfdog and she-wolf, became like a shining blade of ice,
while the old moose bled, bled, still bled.
Like many others, ignored, it was a tragic page of life
of the Wild, which was finally unfolding; a struggle where the weakest had to
die, to perpetuate the existence of the strongest.

An hour finally arrived when, in the center of the circle of death, inflexible and
tenacious, of Gray Wolf and Kazan, the old momentum never looked back.
Gray Wolf and Kazan understood that it was the end and stopped
themselves to turn. They left the trodden snow and, stepping back a
few, flattened themselves under a low fir tree, waiting.

For a long time yet the vanquished monster remained as if frozen in place,
slowly sinking onto his ham folded beneath him. Then, with a
hoarse death rattle, suffocated by blood, he finally collapsed.

Kazan and the blind wolf cautiously returned to their circle, which they
shrank little by little, so as to imperceptibly approach their
victim. When they were close to him, the big bull had a
last and vain start. He fell again.

Gray Wolf, sitting on her behind, threw into the frozen solitude,
where famine raged, a triumphant and mournful cry.

For her and for Kazan, the days of hunger were over.




XVI

TOWARDS THE CURÉE


After the death of the moose, which occurred just in time for the
wolfdog did not succumb to cold and hunger, Kazan, exhausted,
had lain down on the bloody snow. He didn't even have the strength to
operate its jaws.

Gray Wolf, with the superior endurance of her race, rushed to the
opposite on the enormous corpse and had started to bite ferociously
into the thick skin of the neck, in order to expose the hot meat.

Having done this, she did not eat, but ran towards Kazan and moaned softly
close to him, sniffing him with his muzzle and pushing him with his shoulder. He
rose and she brought him to the living flesh, where both, then,
feasted for a long time.

Not until the last pale glow of the northern day had faded
slowly vanished into the night, they never left their prey. They
were stuffed to the jaws and their hollow ribs were
bouncy again.

The wind had weakened. A few clouds which, during the day, had
floated in the sky had dissipated and the moonlight illuminated the
night. To its calm light was soon added that, all
quivering, of the aurora borealis, which unfolded in the sky, in the
direction of the Pole. Its monotonous whistle, like the screeching of steel
sled runners on the frozen snow, weakly reached the
Kazan's ears and those of the sleeping Gray Wolf.

At the first perception of this mysterious noise from the Arctic skies, they
stopped sleeping and were on alert, suspicious and
ears alerted.

They trotted back to the meat they had killed. They
had fought together to bring her down, and were aware that she
belonged to them only by the right of the fang. It was the law of
Wilderness that they would still have to fight to preserve. At the time
on good hunting days, they would have, without more, continued on their way
under the moon and under the stars. But the long days of fasting and
the nights of famine had made them more foresighted.

Their fear was not in vain. Enjoying the peaceful beauty of the
night, which came after so many others, so terrible, thousands,
Hundreds of thousands of hungry creatures of the Wild emerged from their
retreats to collect food. For eighteen hundred miles from the east
to the west, for a thousand miles from south to north, legions of beings
skinny, flat-stomached men, set out on the hunt in the clear night.

Instinct told Kazan and Gray Wolf that this great hunt of
creation had begun, and not for a moment did they stop rising
the guard. Crouching under a bush, they observed, Gray Wolf licking
lovingly the head of Kazan.

Suddenly they flinched and their muscles tensed. Something
living had passed by them, something that Kazan had not been able to
see, that Gray Wolf had not been able to hear, but that they had
faintly perceived in the air.

It was a big white owl which, mysterious as a shadow, impalpable
and silent as a snowflake, had descended into
the atmosphere.

Kazan saw the winged being which had settled on one of the shoulders of the
old momentum. Quick as lightning, he came out of his bush, followed by
Gray Wolf, and, with an angry growl, leapt towards the thief,
gaping jaws. But his mouth closed on the void. His leap
had carried him too far and when he turned around the owl had
flew away.

He walked around the moose, his hair brushed, his eyes dilated and
menacing, snarling and growling towards the peaceful air. Its jaws
slammed towards an invisible enemy and he sat on his behind,
face of the bloody trail that the elk had traced when it came to die here
in the forest. His instinct told him that this was where the
marauders would appear.

The little ermines, with their lively movements, who everywhere, that night,
trotting and hopping around, in the moonlight, like
white rats, were the first to discover the long red ribbon which
unfolded on the snow. Fierce and thirsty for blood, they followed him,
in supple and rapid leaps.

A fox, for its part, had, a quarter of a mile away, smelled the smell of
fresh flesh, brought to him by the wind. And he was coming too.
Emerging from a deep hole, dug in the center of a dead tree, a
fishing cat, with an empty stomach, small round eyes, similar to
rosary beads, also set off, on the crimson ribbon.

As he was the closest, he introduced himself first.
Kazan rushed towards him. There was a volley of claws, a
growling, mutual cries of pain, and the fishing cat forgot his
hunger in flight. Kazan returned to Gray Wolf, his muzzle lacerated.
and bleeding. She licked him, while his ears remained
stiff and tuned.

The fox had heard the sounds of conflict. As he is not, of his
nature, a very valiant fighter, but a simple crag, who likes to
kill from behind and without risk, he turned around and went to get
another prey. He encountered an owl resting on the ground and, having jumped
above, had to make do with a little flesh under a voluminous mass of
feathers.

Kazan, on the other hand, was powerless to stop the invasion of stoats, these
little white outlaws of the Wilderness. They would have slipped between the
feet even of a man, to reach, as they wanted, the
meat and blood of the old elk.

Kazan chased them wildly, left and right. But in
the lunar light, they seemed more fleeting glimmers than
living beings. Faster than him in their movements, they
always escaped. They dug galleries in the snow,
even under the belly of the elk, which they gnawed, and gorged themselves on
completely at ease. Exasperated, Kazan bit indiscriminately, and had
snow in my mouth.

Placidly, Gray Wolf, sitting on his behind, let him do it.
She knew there was nothing to try with the little stoats and
she considered it superfluous to worry otherwise. Kazan ends up
he understood, too, and came to find her, panting and blowing.

Part of the night passed without incident. Sometimes
only, we heard the distant howl of a wolf, or, punctuating
the funeral silence, the hooting of the white owl that Kazan had chased away
and who, from the fir tree on which he was perched, whispered his protest.

The moon was at its zenith, above the clearing, when Gray Wolf
started to get agitated. Facing the bloody trail, she growled, for
warn Kazan.

So fierce was his growl that his companion did not remember
to have heard one like it since the day of the tragic fight on the
Sun Rock, where Gray Wolf had lost her sight under the claws of the lynx.
Kazan had no doubt that a big gray cat was on its way on the trail.
red and he sniffed the air, baring his fangs and preparing to
the battle.

But then, about a mile away, a wild cry broke out, uttered at full
throat.

This cry was that of the true son of the Great White Desert: the wolf.

Kazan and Gray Wolf stood shoulder to shoulder. This cry was not
not a threat to them. It was the clamor of hunger and the call of
their brothers.

A change took place in their minds. Beyond the fox, the
fishing cat and the little white ermines, beyond all the
other beasts of the Wild, the fierce horde had a common right to pasture.
Above all, existed the Brotherhood of the Wolf.

Gray Wolf sat down on her backside and, like a bugle call,
launched to his brothers of the Wilderness the triumphant call, which announced to them
that at the end of the red trail a vast feast was served to them.

And the big gray cat that prowled around the clearing, hearing the
double clamor, was frightened. He crept away, his ears down, and
got lost in the vast forest bathed in the moon.




XVII

FOR THE LOVE OF THE WOLF


Sitting on their behinds, Kazan and Gray Wolf waited.

Five minutes passed, then ten, then fifteen. Gray Wolf began
to worry. No cry answered his call. She threw
again his sonorous howl and, while Kazan shivered at his
side, she questioned the silence. Why didn't the horde have him
point given the distant customary reply?

But, almost at the same time, his nostrils dilated. Those that she
called were there.

Kazan saw a shape emerging in a moonbeam,
the end of the clearing. Then a second followed, then another
again, until there were five of them, sticking out their heads
lowered, sniffing the red trail.

They stopped about sixty yards away and remained motionless.

Then, strangely enough, Kazan saw Gray Wolf retreating. He saw her
folded its ears and bared its fangs, and heard rolling in its
throats a hostile growl.

Why that? Why was she putting herself on the defensive like this?
now that she was in the presence of her racial brothers, that she herself
had called to the priesthood?

Without heeding her warnings, he advanced, with light steps,
head held high, spine bristling, towards the new arrivals. His flair,
unlike that of Gray Wolf, taught him for them the
sympathy.

He stopped about twenty steps from the small group, who had crouched
in the snow.

The plume of its tail began to wave, while one of the beasts
had jumped up and approached him. The others made
same, and the next moment Kazan was in the middle of the group. We
sniffed and reflected each other, with all the obvious signs of
Satisfaction. The newcomers were not wolves. They were
dogs.

In some isolated cabin in the frozen solitude, their master had died.
So they were off to the Wild.

They still bore the marks of the sled harnesses to which they
had been attached. Around their necks were collars of skin
momentum. On their furred sides, the hairs were short and worn, and one
of them still trailed behind him a line three feet long. Half
starved, they were sinisterly thin. Their eyes glowed,
reddish, in their hollow orbits.

Kindly, Kazan trotted ahead of them and brought them before the body of the
old momentum. Then he went to join Gray Wolf and, all proud and
satisfied, sat near her, listening to the chewing of the jaws
poor fellows who were celebrating. And, as Gray Wolf seemed
still worried, he gave her a quick caress with his tongue, so that
to assure him that everything was fine.

Their meal finished, the dogs came towards Kazan and towards Louve
Gray, in order to get to know each other better. The blind wolf appeared
especially interested them, and they sniffed her on all her faces.
This familiarity displeased Kazan, who began to closely monitor these
cheeky.

One of the dogs was especially wonderful. It was the one who hung around after
him the broken line. He brought his nose close to that of Gray Wolf and
touched, Kazan uttered a shrill cry as a warning. The dog
stepped back and, both of them, over the head of the blind wolf,
showed their fangs. It was the Male Challenge.

The big husky was the leader of the pack. No other dog had ever
dared to resist him. He expected that Kazan, like the others,
trembled before him and fled, tail lowered.

He seemed surprised to see that this was not the case. Kazan, on the contrary,
was ready to leap over the she-wolf and immediately engage the
fight. The big husky moved away, growling and snarling, and discharged his
anger on one of his comrades, whom he bit fiercely on the side.

Gray Wolf, without showing anything, had understood well what was happening.
was passing. She pressed herself against Kazan, caressed him and tried to
to persuade them that they should both move away. She knew, in fact,
that although it was postponed, the fight was no less fatal and it
trembled for his companion.

Kazan's response was a roll of thunder that rumbled in his
throat. He licked Gray Wolf's blind eyes and lay down near
of her, face to face with the strange dogs.

The moon was lowering in the sky and it finally disappeared in the west,
behind the tops of the fir trees. Then it was the stars' turn to fade
and to fade away little by little, to make way for the gray and cold dawn of
Northland.

In that dawn, Kazan saw the big husky get up from the hole he had
dug in the snow and head towards what remained of the old man's body
momentum.

He was immediately on his feet and also moved towards the body.
torn, head lowered, spine bristling.

The big husky pretended to move away a few steps and give way.
place in Kazan. This attacked the frozen flesh. He wasn't hungry.
But he claimed to show in this way his right to this flesh, his right which
took precedence over all others.

While he was biting into the neck of the elk and seemed in
forget Gray Wolf, the husky, slipping back, mute as a
shadow, went towards the she-wolf and began to sniff at her again all the time.
body. Then, unable to remain silent any longer in the ardor of his
rut, he uttered a soft moan to Gray Wolf, which
spoke of his passion, the demands of nature and the Wild, and which invited him
to submit to it. Gray Wolf responded by thrusting her fingers deep
fangs in the gallant's shoulder.

A gray trail, silent and terrible, passed through the half-light of
dawn. It was Kazan who jumped. Without a grunt, without a cry,
he was on the husky and the next moment both were grappling,
in a merciless duel. The other four dogs ran up and
stood motionless a dozen steps from the two champions, in
waiting for the outcome of the battle. Gray Wolf remained lying on
floor.

It was a brief and fierce fight.

Equal rage and hatred animated the giant husky and the wolfdog.
Each of them, alternately, had its hold on the other. It was
sometimes one and sometimes the other who was standing or rolling on the ground. If
quickly the phases of the fight took place that the four dogs
spectators could not recognize anything in it. As soon as they saw Kazan or
the husky turned on its back, they quivered with the desire to throw themselves on
him, as was the custom, to tear him to pieces. But they
hesitated and gave up, afraid, because the final decision
appeared uncertain.

The big husky had never been defeated in any battle. Of its
Danish ancestors he had inherited a formidable mass and a jaw
capable of crushing the head of an ordinary dog ​​in its grip. But
in Kazan he found both the dog and the wolf, their various modes
of combat, and the best in both
breed. Both, finally, had regained their strength on the flesh of the
old momentum.

They had grabbed each other, and firmly, Kazan holding the
husky by the shoulder, the husky holding Kazan by the throat and looking for the
jugular vein. Then, together, they let go and free themselves, to
a new attack. The four dogs moved forward slightly,
vigilant, with fixed eyes and open mouths, waiting for the
outcome.

Resorting to his favorite tactic, Kazan began to circle around
of his adversary, as he had done, with Louve Grise, around the
old momentum. The husky seemed quite taken aback. He pivoted painfully
on himself, his ears folded back, and limping on his broken shoulder.

All Kazan's prudence had returned to him and, although he was bleeding
abundantly, he had regained his wisdom and self-control. Five times
he described his fatal circle around the big husky. Then, suddenly, like
A shot fired, he rushed sideways at his enemy with all his might.
weight, to overturn it.

The shock was so violent that the husky fell, all four legs
the air. And already the four dogs, which made up the merciless court
of death, were upon him.

All the hatred accumulated in them for weeks and months, against
the arrogant leader, with the long fangs, who had tyrannized them under the
harness, gave himself free rein and, in the blink of an eye, he was put in
shreds.

Kazan proudly came to camp alongside Gray Wolf, who had
left to fight alone. With a little happy whine, she placed
cuddle his head on the neck of the triumphant. It was the second time
that, for her sake, Kazan had faced mortal combat. Two
time he had won.

And his soul--if it had a soul--exulted towards the gray and cold sky,
while, raising her blind eyes towards the invisible dawn, she
listened to the flesh and bones of
the enemy that his lord and master had slain.




XVIII

THE CARNIVAL OF THE WILD


For three days and three nights, Kazan and Gray Wolf lived on the
frozen flesh of the old elk, standing guard beside him, in company
of the four dogs who immediately recognized Kazan for their
chief.

Gray Wolf didn't care much about this society. She would have preferred
being alone with her companion and, several times, she tried to
lure him after him, into the forest. But, in animals as in
people, pride is great to dominate and it was not without pleasure
that Kazan had regained its former dignity and the forgotten time when it
commanded the sled dogs.

The temperature, however, was getting milder and milder and the hunt
customary would become possible again.

Kazan took her back during the night of the fourth day and led her with
lively, at the head of the pack of four dogs. For the first time,
he had left behind his blind companion.

A young deer was lifted up and forced. Kazan jumped at his throat and killed him.
And not until he was satisfied did the other dogs allow themselves
to taste the common prey. He was the master, the all-powerful tsar,
which made them retreat with a simple grunt. By the mere appearance of his
fanged, they lay down trembling, on their stomachs, in the snow.

Gray Wolf arrived, half an hour later, sad, with hanging ears.
and head bowed. She barely tasted the deer. His blind eyes
seemed to beg Kazan not to abandon him, to part with these
intruder, to relive past solitude with her.

His entreaties remained without force, because the three-quarters of a dog which
were in Kazan that he did not mind
reunite with these consanguineous cousins, in whose society he had so much
long lived. He had learned to hate man, not dogs. A
another influence now counterbalanced that of Gray Wolf.

Two weeks passed like this. Under the growing heat of the sun,
the thermometer continued to rise and the snow on the ground began to
melt. Soon Gray Wolf felt, for the second time, in her
flanks an upcoming maternity ward.

But, despite his protests, the little troop continued to
head east and south. Kazan and the dogs knew that
it was on this side that this civilization with which they
wanted to reconnect. The man was in that direction.
And they hadn't lived the life of the Wild long enough for
the attraction of the past would have completely ceased to act on them.

The six animals thus arrived near one of the advanced posts of the
Hudson Bay. As they trotted along a long ridge, something
something stopped them. It was the piercing voice of a man, shouting this word
well known to the four dogs and Kazan: “Kouch! Kush! Kouch!”
Below them, in fact, they saw, in the open plain, a
team of six dogs pulling a sled. A man was running
behind, exciting them with this repeated cry: “Kouch! Kush! Kouch!”

The four huskies and the wolfdog remained trembling and undecided,
with Gray Wolf crawling behind them. When the sleigh had
disappeared, they went down towards the trail he had left and
sniffed suddenly, in great agitation.

For nearly a mile they followed her, flanked by Gray Wolf, who
cautiously, and worried by such rashness, stood a little offshore.
The smell of the man made her feel inexpressibly uncomfortable and only his
attachment to Kazan prevented him from fleeing far away.

Then Kazan stopped and, to Gray Wolf's great joy, abandoned the
track. The part of the wolf he had in him took over and he
said to challenge yourself. At the signal he gave, the whole company
returned to the nearest forest.

Everywhere the snow was melting and, with spring, the Wilderness was emptying
of all the men who had lived there during the winter. Out of a hundred
miles around the little troop, it was only trappers and
hunters, who were returning to the Factory, bringing their
booty of furs. Their multiple tracks put like a net
around the wandering band, which had ended up getting closer to
thirty miles from the Post.

And, while the blind wolf was panicking more and more every day,
threat of man, Kazan ended up no longer able to bear going
join his former tormentors.

He could catch the pungent smell of campfires in the air. He
heard, during the night, snatches of wild songs, followed by
yelps and barking of packs of dogs. Very close to him, he
one day heard the laughter of a white man and the joyful bark of his
team, to which the man threw the daily fish feed
dried.

Mile by mile, inevitably, Kazan was getting closer to the Poste and Louve
Grise felt the hour approaching when the final call, louder than the
others, would take away his companion.

In the Hudson's Bay Company branch, entertainment
was big. Days of settling scores for trappers, days of
profits and days of pleasure. Days when the Wild brought his treasure
furs, which would then be shipped to London and Paris, and
to other European capitals.

And there was, this year, in the gathering of all the people of
Wild, an additional interest and more thrilling than usual. There
Red Death had passed and only now would we know, by
seeing or not seeing them return, the number of those who had
survived or died.

The Chippewayan Indians and the half-breeds of the South arrived first,
with their teams of hybrid dogs, collected along the borders
of the civilized world.

After them appeared the hunters of the barren lands of the West. They
brought their loads of caribou and white fox skins,
hauled by an army of Mackenzie hounds, with large legs and
big feet, which pulled as hard as horses and which began to
squawking like pugs being whipped, when the big huskies and
the Eskimo dogs ran after them. Labrador dogs,
fierce and terrible among all, and which only death could conquer,
arrived from the northern reaches of Hudson Bay. The malemutes
of the Athabasca were enormous, with a dark coat, and the dogs
Eskimos, yellow or gray, were as quick with their fangs as
their little masters, dark and oily, were agile[30].

  [30] Hounds, Labrador dogs, Eskimo dogs,
    Malemutes are, like huskies, so many varieties of dogs
    sleds.

All these packs, as they arrived, did not fail to
throwing at each other, growling, barking, snapping and biting. He
There was no stopping in the battle of the fangs.

The fighting began at dawn, with the arrival of sleds at
Post, continued all day and, in the evening, around the fires of the
camps. These canine antipathies had no end. Everywhere
melting snow was stained with blood.

During these day and night battles, those who suffered the
more were the hybrid dogs of the South, derived and mixed from mastiffs,
Danes and sheepdogs, and the heavy and slow hounds of the
Mackenzie.

When the liquefied snow became completely impassable to
sleds and there was no longer any hope of seeing any new
arriving, William, the agent of the Factory, was able to draw up the list
definitive of the men who were missing. He crossed out their accounts from his
registers, because he knew well that the Red Death had them
broke.

A hundred campfires rose their smoke around the Post
and, from the tents to these fires, women and
the children of the hunters, most of whom had brought them with them.

But where this commotion was especially considerable was on the night of
Great Carnival. For weeks and months, men, women and
children, of the forest and the plain, white men and redskins,
even the little Eskimos who dreamed of it in their icy huts,
had waited for this joyous hour, this crazy night of pleasure, which
would restore some appeal to life. It was the Company which
offered the party to everyone she employed or with whom she
was trading.

This year more than others, in order to dispel sad memories
of the Red Death, the agent was in trouble.

He had his hunters kill four large caribou and, in the
vast clearing which surrounded the Factory, stacking enormous piles of
dry logs. On fir forks, ten feet high, rested,
as a brooch, another fir tree, smooth and stripped of its bark. He
There were four of these pins and on each of them was threaded a
whole caribou, roasting over the fire.

The flames ignited at dusk and the agent himself
sang the _Song of the Caribou_, famous throughout Northland:

    Oh! the caribou-ou-ou, the caribou-ou-ou
        It roasts in the air,
        High under the clear sky,
    The big white caribou-ou-ou!

--It's your turn! he yelled. To you, and in chorus!

And, waking up from the long silence which, for so long, had weighed on them
in the Wild, men, women and children sang the song to their
tower, with a wild frenzy, which burst towards the sky. At the same time,
taking each other by the hands, they set in motion, around the four
pins enveloped in flames, the Great Round.

For many miles south and north, east and west, echoed
this tremendous thunder. Kazan and Gray Wolf, and the outlaws without
masters who were with them heard it. And soon mingled with
human voices the distant howl of dogs, excited by the saraband
infernal.

Gray Wolf and Kazan's companions couldn't hold still. They
pricked their ears in the direction of the immense noise and
moaned plaintively.

Kazan was no less troubled. He began his usual routine with
Gray Wolf, who had backed away, showing her teeth, and was trying to
to lead after him. Always, moreover, just as in vain.

Then he returned to the four huskies. At this moment, a whiff of
wind brought more distinct the sonorous echo of the Carnival of the Wild and its
ardent resonances. The four beasts, forgetting the authority of Kazan, do not
no longer resisted the call of man. Lowering his head and
ears, and flattening themselves on the ground, they slipped like shadows,
in the direction of the noise.

The wolfdog still hesitated. More and more, he pressed Gray Wolf,
hiding under a bush, to agree to follow him. She didn't flinch.
She would have, alongside her companion, even faced fire. But
not the man.

The blind wolf heard on the dried leaves a rapid sound of
legs moving away. The next moment she knew Kazan was
left. Only then did she come out of her bush and began to
whine out loud.

Kazan heard her complaint, but did not turn around. The other call was
The Strongest. The four huskies had a fairly strong lead over him
and he tried, in a mad rush, to catch up with them.

Then he calmed down a little, started trotting and soon stopped. Less than one
thousand in front of him, he could see the flames of the great fires which
purpled the darkness and reflected in the sky. He looked
behind him, as if hoping that Gray Wolf would appear.
After waiting a few minutes, he set off again.

It didn't take long for him to come across a clearly marked trail. It was the one
where one of the four caribou, which were roasting, had been
dragged along a few days ago. He followed her and reached the trees which
bordered the vast clearing where the Factory stood.

The glow of flames was now in his eyes. In front of him, the
Grande Ronde was unfolding disheveled.

You might have thought you were in a madhouse. The noise was
truly satanic. The bass singing of men, the voice more
piercing of women and children, the stamping and bursts of
everyone's laughter, all accompanied by the wild barking of a
hundred dogs. Kazan's ears were stunned. But he
burned with desire to join the demonic concert. Hidden in the shadows
from a fir tree, he still restrained his momentum, his nostrils dilated towards the
wonderful aroma of the caribou which were finishing roasting. The instinct to
The prudence of the wolf, which Gray Wolf had instilled in him, gave him a
last Stand.

Suddenly the round stopped, the singing fell silent. Men, using
long stakes, unhooked the pins which carried them the enormous
bodies of the caribou, which they placed, dripping with fat, on
floor.

There was then a general and joyful rush of all the guests, who
had drawn up their cutlasses or their knives. And, behind this
circle, followed that of the dogs, in a yapping and growling mass.
Kazan, this time, could no longer hold it. Abandoning his tree, he rushed
in the clearing.

As he arrived, fast as lightning, a dozen men of
the Factorerie agent, armed with long whips, had started to
make the animals retreat. The thong of one of the whips fell,
formidable and sharp, on the shoulder of an Eskimo dog, near which
Kazan just happened to be there. The animal, furious, shouted
towards the whip, and it was Kazan whose fangs bit into the rump.
Kazan returned the blow and, in a second, the jaws of the two dogs
yawned at each other. The next second, the Eskimo dog was
on the ground, with Kazan holding him by the throat.

The men rushed forward, cursing and cursing. Their whips cracked,
and fell like knives. Kazan, who was on his opponent,
felt the stinging pain. Then suddenly the memory came back to him
cruel of bygone days, which had made man his tyrant. He growled
and, slowly, loosened his grip.

As he raised his head, he saw another man emerging from the
melee--because, led by example, all the other dogs had rushed
against each other--and this man was holding a club in his hand!

The club slammed into his back and the force of the blow sent him flattening
On the ground. Then the club rose again. Behind the huge stick
was a rough and fierce face, lit by the red reflections of the fires.
It was such a face that once pushed Kazan to the Wild. As
the club was lowering, he made a sudden move to avoid it, and the
ivory knives from his teeth gleamed.

For the third time the club rose. Kazan, leaping, caught
the forearm of the man who carried it and lacerated the flesh down to the
hand.

--Thunder of God! the man shouted.

And Kazan perceived in the night the glow of a gun barrel.

But he was already running towards the forest. A shot rings out. Some
something that looked like a red coal brushed against the fugitive's side.

When he was far enough away to be certain of not being pursued, the
wolfdog stopped running and licked the burning furrow that the ball
had traced, scorching the hair and taking away a flap of skin.

He found Gray Wolf still waiting for him in the same place. All
joyful, she jumped to meet him. Once again, the man had
sent away his companion.




XIX

A SON OF KAZAN


Shoulder to shoulder, the two animals set off again in the direction of
northwest, while the great noise died away behind them.

Step by step, they returned, after several days, to
marshes where they had rested during the famine and before the meeting of the
wild dogs.

Then the ground was frozen and buried in snow. Today the sun
shone in the warm sky, in all the glory of spring. Everywhere
the ice was cracking and crumbling, the snow was melting, and
a multitude of torrential waters flowed on the ground. Everywhere
thaw and the death of winter were felt, among the rocks that
reappeared as among the trees, and the magnificent, cold clarity
of the aurora borealis, which had illuminated so many past nights, had
retreated further, further still towards the Pole, its glory fading.

The poplars were swelling their buds, ready to burst, and the air
soaked up the penetrating scent of balsam, fir and cedar trees.
Where, six weeks before, famine and death reigned, Kazan and
Gray Wolf inhaled with full nostrils the smell of the earth and
listened to all the sounds of renewed life pulsate.

Above their heads, a pair of newly minted elkbirds[31]
paired, fluttered and cried at them. A big jay was preening
its feathers in the sun. Further away, they heard a heavy hoof
caused the twigs littering the ground to crack under its weight.
They also noticed the smell of a mother bear, who was very busy
pull the branches of a poplar and their buds towards the ground, from which
delighted her cubs. Everywhere the mystery exuded from nature
love and that of motherhood. And Gray Wolf kept rubbing
his blind head against Kazan's. She was only for him
caresses and invitations to curl up against her, in a nest
warm.

  [31] The moose-bird. These birds have the habit of
    come and land on the backs of the elk, which they rid of their
    parasites, as the starlings do with the oxen and the
    sheep.

She felt no desire to hunt. The smell of a caribou, nor that of
the mother bear, no longer aroused in her any combative instinct. Her
her stomach had grown heavy again and she tried in vain to say
this to his companion.

They both arrived in front of the hollow tree which had been their
old gîte. Kazan recognized him immediately and Gray Wolf felt him.

The ground, slightly raised, had not been invaded by water here.
coming from the melting snow and who put his mirror in many
part of the marsh. But a small torrent surrounded the bottom of the tree and
completely isolated him.

While Gray Wolf pricked up her ears to the lapping waters, Kazan
searched, on the right and on the left, for a ford that it would be possible to cross.
He found none, but a large cedar which had fallen across the
torrent and formed a bridge. He committed to it and, after some hesitation,
Gray Wolf followed him.

They thus reached their old retreat. They smelled it, with
prudence, openness and, as nothing appeared abnormal to them, they
decided to enter. Tired and panting, Gray Wolf let herself fall by
land immediately, in the darkest corner of the found nest, and Kazan
came towards her, to lick her head as a sign of satisfaction. After
which, he prepared to go out, in order to explore a little.

As he stood on the threshold of his home, the smell of a living thing
suddenly came to him. He stiffens on his paws and his hair
bristled.

Two minutes had passed but a cackling, similar to that
of a child, was heard and a porcupine appeared. Him too
was looking for shelter and, with his eyes on the ground, without looking in front of him,
was coming straight towards the tree.

Kazan was not unaware that the porcupine, when one does not attack
he is the most harmless beast there is. He doesn't think
that a simple grunt from his throat would be enough to make him move away,
quickly and obediently, this good-natured, chattering and chirping creature,
who constantly monologues with herself. All he saw there was an annoying person, who
came to bother him and Gray Wolf. In short, the mood of the moment fit
that he thoughtlessly jumped on the porcupine.

A crescendo of squeals, whimpers and pig squeals,
to which a frenzied range of howls responded, was the result of
this attack.

Gray Wolf rushed out of her tree, while the porcupine
had quickly rolled up into a ball bristling with quills and that
Kazan, a few feet away, was struggling madly, prey to
the most bitter pangs that a guest of the Wild can experience.

Its mouth and snout were like a pincushion. He
rolled on the ground, digging a large hole in the humus, and throwing
claws, indiscriminately, at the darts that pierced him
flesh. Then, as the lynx had done on the strip of sand, as
do it all animals that have made too close contact with the friend
porcupine, he suddenly got up and started running all around
the islet, screaming with each of its disorderly leaps.

The blind wolf could easily guess what was happening. She doesn't care
was not unduly alarming and perhaps--who knows what ideas might
germinate in the brains of animals?--was she internally amused by the
misadventure befell her imprudent companion, of which she heard and
featured grotesque frolicking.

As, moreover, she could do nothing about it, she sat down on her
behind and waited, only pricking up his ears and stepping aside
little, each time in his mad circle Kazan passed too close
of her.

The porcupine, meanwhile, is satisfied with the success of his maneuver
defensive, had carefully unrolled, had folded his
quills and, while waddling, had silently gained a
neighboring poplar, which he climbed nimbly, clinging to it with
claws. After which he began to nibble, very calmly, the tender
bark of a small branch.

After a certain number of laps, Kazan decided to stop in front of
Gray Wolf. The pain caused to him by the terrible needles
had lost its sharpness. But she left in her flesh the impression
of a deep and continuous burn.

Gray Wolf walked towards him, approached him very close, and felt him with her
muzzle and tongue, with caution. Then she delicately grabs
between her teeth two or three quills, which she tore out.

Kazan let out a satisfied little yelp and Gray Wolf repeated the
same operation with a second bunch of quills. So, confident, he
lay flat on his stomach, front legs extended, closed his eyes
and, without moaning any more, only throwing out from time to time, a _yip_
complaining, when the pain was too severe, he abandoned himself to the care
skills of his nurse.

His poor muzzle was soon red with blood. An hour, Louve
Grise, despite her blindness, applied herself to her task and, at the end of this
In time, she had managed to extirpate most of the cursed stingers. Alone
a few remained, which were too short or too deep
deeply so that his teeth could grasp them.

Kazan then went down to the small stream and dipped in the icy water
his snout burning. It was a relief, only momentary. Because
the quills which had remained in the living flesh did not take long to
produce, in its muzzle and lips, an inflammation which does not
only increased as they tore the tissue further,
where they entered like a living thing.

Lips and muzzle began to swell. Kazan drooled saliva mixed with
blood and his eyes were turning red. Two hours after Gray Wolf,
having finished her task, returned to her lodging and went there
lying down again, the unfortunate man was still at the same point.

He threw himself, in rage, on a piece of wood that he came across, and
bit furiously. He felt one of the darts that made him break
suffer the most, and he reiterated.

Nature had indicated to him the only remedy which was within his reach and which
consisted of forcefully chewing earth and pieces of wood. In
this crushing, the tip of the darts became dull and the darts
they themselves were breaking. Ultimately, the pressure put on them
caused flesh to burst forth, like a splinter pushed out of the
finger.

At dusk, Kazan was completely liberated and he went to join
Gray Wolf in the hollow of the tree. But, several times during the night, he
had to get up again and go to the small stream, in order to calm the
unappeased cooking.

The next day, he was not pretty, pretty, and his face had what the
Wild people call it “the porcupine grimace.” The mouth was swollen
to the point that Gray Wolf would have twisted with laughter, if she had not
been blind and if she had been a human being. The lips were, the
along the jaws, swollen like cushions. The eyes were not
more than two narrow slits, in the middle of a general flux of the
face.

When Kazan came out of the tree and came into the light, he could hardly
see better than his blind companion. The pain, at least, was gone
largely gone. The following night, he could think of hunting
again and returned, before dawn, with a rabbit.

The hunt could have been more successful and included a partridge of
fir trees if, at the very moment when Kazan was about to jump towards the bird resting on
the ground, he had only heard the soft cackling of a porcupine.

He was pinned to the spot. He was not easy to frighten. But the
incoherent and empty squawking of the creature with its cruel stingers is enough to
terrify him and make him run away, a few moments later,
at an accelerated pace, tail between the legs.

With the same invincible apprehension that man feels for the
snake, Kazan had to always avoid, from now on, this creature of the
Wild, so good-natured, that we have never seen, in animal history,
lose his chattering cheerfulness or pick trouble with anyone.

Two weeks, after the adventure of Kazan and the porcupine, the
days continued to grow, the sun increasing its heat. THE
The last snows quickly disappeared. Everywhere
poplar buds burst, where shoots appeared
green, and sparkled the crimson leaves of the red vine. On
the sunniest slopes, among the rocks, the small
snowdrops opened their corollas, a decisive announcement that spring
had come.

During the first week, Gray Wolf hunted more than once with
Kazan. They didn't need to go far. The marsh was teeming with
small game and, every day or night, they killed meat
fresh.

During the second week, Gray Wolf hunted less. Then came a
night, an embalmed night, magnificent and sweet under the rays of the
full spring moon, where she refused to leave the hollow of
the tree.

Kazan did not encourage him to do so. Instinct made him understand that a
new event was brewing. He left for the hunt, without much
away, and soon brought back a white rabbit.

A few more days passed and another night came when, in the
darkest corner of her retreat, Gray Wolf greeted with a growl
stifled Kazan who was returning. He remained on the threshold of the tree, with a
rabbit which he held in his mouth, and did not enter.

After a few moments, he dropped the rabbit, his eyes fixed
on the darkness where Gray Wolf lay. Finally, he lay down
across, in front of the entrance to the den. Then, all agitated, he recovered
on his feet and walked away.

He only returned with daylight. As of old on the Sun Rock he sniffed,
sniffed. What floated in the air was no longer an enigma to him. He
approached Gray Wolf and she didn't growl. He smelled her and
caressed, while she moaned softly. Then his muzzle discovered
something else, breathing weakly.

Kazan, that day, did not go hunting again. He stretched out
voluptuously in the sun, head hanging and jaws open,
as a sign of the great satisfaction that was within him.




XX

BARI EDUCATION


Frustrated for the first time from family joys by the Sun drama
Rock, Kazan and Gray Wolf had not forgotten the tragic adventure.

At the slightest noise, Gray Wolf flinched and trembled, ready to pounce.
on the invisible enemy that would present itself and to tear all flesh that
was not that of Kazan and his little one.

Kazan was no less worried and alert. He constantly jumped on his
paws and spied around him. He distrusted the moving shadows, which
walks the wind under the sun or under the moon. The crack of a
branch, the quivering of the slightest twig made people curl up
his lips on his fangs. He threatened and growled towards the sweetness of
the air, each time a foreign odor reached his nostrils.

Not for a single moment, neither day nor night, was he distracted from his guard.
As surely as we expect, every morning, to see the rise of
sun, he expected to see, one day or another, sooner or later,
appear, leaping or crawling, their mortal enemy. It was in
such an hour that the lynx had brought with it blindness and
dead.

But peace had spread its wings of sunshine over the marsh. There
had, around Kazan and Louve Grise, other foreigners than the
silent whiskey-jack[32], the elk-birds, with round eyes, the
chattering sparrows in the bushes, friendly wood mice and
the little ermines.

  [32] Kind of jay, with big eyes, from Northland.

Kazan finally reassured himself. Leaving his faction from time to time, he
went, in the shadows, to sniff out his son, the only wolf cub that
Gray Wolf had fathered.

This cub, if the Indians _Dog Ribs_[33], who live a little further
towards the west, had they had to give it a name, they would have had it without any
doubt called _Baree_ (Bari), which in their language means both
'no brother or sister' and 'wolf dog', two things he was
Effectively.

  [33] _Dog Ribs_ or Côtes-de-Chiens.

He was, from the start, a sweet and lively little man, to whom his mother
provided all the care she was capable of. It developed with the
early speed of a wolf, and not with the slowness customary to cubs
dogs.

For the first three days he did nothing but sit
pack, as close as possible, against his mother's belly. He was suckling
when he was hungry, he slept to his heart's content, and the affectionate tongue of
Gray Wolf kept combing and cleaning him.

On the fourth day, his curiosity began to awaken. With huge
efforts, and clutching his claws to the Gray Wolf's fur, he hoisted himself up
to his mother's mouth. Then he risked moving away from her,
dragged a few feet away, capsizing on its soft legs,
and, once there, began to sniff desperately, believing everything
never lost.

He then knew that Kazan was like a game of Gray Wolf. Eight
days had not passed when he came, with satisfaction, to
curl up between his father's front paws and fall asleep there
peacefully.

The first time he did this, Kazan seemed very taken aback. He ... not
did not move for half an hour, and Gray Wolf came, very happy, to lick
the little runaway.

At ten days old, Bari discovered the concept of the game and that it was a sport
unparalleled in pulling a piece of rabbit skin after him.

All this was still happening in the dark house in the hollow of the tree.
Until the cub learned to know what the
light and the sun.

It was a beautiful afternoon. Through a hole that was drilled in
the bark of the tree, a resplendent ray made its way and came
fall on the ground, next to Bari. Bari began by staring, with
astonishment, the streak of gold. Then, soon, he tried to play with
her, as he had done with the rabbit skin. He didn't understand
why he could not grasp it; but, from then on, he knew this
what were the light and the sun.

The following days he went to the opening of the den, where he saw
shine this same brightness, and, with dazzled and flashing eyes, lay down,
afraid, on the threshold of the vast world that he had before him.

Gray Wolf, who had been watching him all this time, then stopped
to keep him in the tree. She herself went to lie down in the sun and called
her son towards her. The weak eyes of the cub gradually became accustomed to
little to the solar light, which Bari learned to love. He loved the warmth of
the air, the sweetness of life, and had nothing but repulsion for the
obscure darkness of the cave where he was born.

He also did not take long to know that everything in the universe was not
not sweet and good. One day when a storm threatened and Bari was on the prowl,
carefree, on the islet, Gray Wolf called him back towards her and towards the shelter
protector of the tree. The cub, who did not understand what
meant this call, turned a deaf ear. But Nature took charge
to teach him, at his expense. A terrible deluge of rain
suddenly fell on him, in the blinding light of lightning and
crash of thunder. Literally terrified, he flattened himself on the ground, and
was soaked to the skin, and almost drowned, before Gray Wolf
arrived to seize him in his jaws and take him home.

This was how, successively, his reasoning was formed and his
various instincts continued to arise. The day his snoop
encountered a freshly killed and bloody rabbit, which Kazan
had just brought, he had the first taste of blood. He found that it was
delicious. And the same impression was renewed, from then on, every time
Kazan returned with prey in his jaws. As he should
learn to kill himself, abandoning the soft rabbit skins
which he had enjoyed until then, he soon began to fight with
fallen branches and pieces of wood, where it sharpened and strengthened
the teeth, which were transformed, during this exercise, into hard and sharp
small fangs.

The time thus arrived when the Great Enigma of Life was revealed to him and
of death. Kazan had brought back a big white rabbit in his mouth,
still alive, but in such bad shape that he could not get up
when the wolfdog had placed him on the ground. Bari knew this well
that were rabbits and partridges, and now preferred their flesh
bloody with his mother's sweet milk. But always rabbits and partridges
had come dead.

This time, the rabbit, his back broken, convulsed and struggled on the
ground. The wolf cub, at this sight, backed away in terror. Then he returned from
forward, curiously spying on the throes of agony of the unfortunate
beast.

Sensing that things were not progressing, Gray Wolf came to the
rabbit, sniffed it closely, half a dozen times, without however
give the liberating bite, and turned his blind face towards Bari.
As for Kazan, lying nonchalantly on the ground, a few steps away, he
continued to observe and seemed to be enjoying himself greatly.

Every time Gray Wolf lowered her head and ran her muzzle over
the rabbit, the little ears of the cub stood up, attentive and
alerted. When he saw that no harm was coming to his mother, he approached
a little more, cautiously and with stiff legs. Soon he was able to
touch the rabbit and, like its mother, it placed its snout on the fur
who was lying, seemingly inert.

But the rabbit wasn't dead yet. In a violent convulsion, he
folded and unfolded his rear train, sending to Bari a mistress
kick, which sent him sprawling, several feet away, squealing
terror.

Quickly, however, the cub got back on its feet. He was in
great anger and felt a violent desire for revenge. He returned to the
charges, less fearfully, his little back bristling, and, finishing
himself his education, buried his sharp fangs in the rabbit's neck. He
felt life pulsating in the panting body, the muscles of the rabbit
in agony contract under him, and he did not loosen his teeth
before all vital thrill had disappeared from his first victim.

Gray Wolf was delighted. She gave, with her tongue, a caress to the
cub and Kazan, having got up, expressed his approval with a
sniffing well felt. Bari ate all he wanted of the rabbit, and
never before had blood and meat seemed so delicious to him.

One by one, all the mysteries of life were revealed to him. He learned not to
not be frightened by the gray owl's hideous hoot of love, the crunching
of a falling tree, of the roll of thunder, of the tumult of water
current, the piercing cry of the fishing cat, the bellowing of the elk
female in heat, nor the distant call of her wolf brothers, howling in
the night.

He became aware of his sense of smell which, of all these mysteries, was the
more wonderful. As he wandered one day about fifty yards from the
family home, his nose encountered the warm smell of a rabbit on the ground.
Immediately, without reasoning about his sensation and without any other process of his
thought, he knew that, to arrive at the living flesh that he loved, he
It was enough to follow this smell. So he did, wriggling with
contentment all along the trail he had discovered. He arrived
to a large tree trunk, overturned on the ground, over which the rabbit
had jumped. The track was cut and Bari, completely disoriented, turned back
path.

Every day, he set off on his own for new adventures and, the same
to an explorer who landed without a compass on an unknown land, he
launched at random, into the unknown. And, every day, he encountered
new, always wonderful, often frightening. But his terrors,
now, were decreasing, and his confidence was increasing, since at
remaining, no very serious harm befell him.

Along with his brain, his physical body was forming. He was not
plus a small, plump, chubby mass. Its shapes
became more flexible, his movements became more lively. Her dress
yellowish browned and a light gray band appeared all along the
his spine, as there was one at Kazan. His head, elongated and
fine, reminiscent of his mother's. But, for the rest of the body, it
took after his father.

He had stocky limbs and a broad chest, which announced
its future strength. His eyes opened wide, with, at the corners, a little
red. All forest people know what to expect when they
notice, in the eyes of the little huskies, this drop of blood. She
means that the beast was born in the Wild, and that its mother or father
were taken among the wild hordes of outlaws of the Great Desert
White. This red stain was especially pronounced in Bari. She
meant that, although half-dog, he was a true son of the Wild, who
had regained his hold on him.

When the islet surrounded by water, on which the lodge of the
cub, had been completely explored by him, he thought of passing on
the opposite bank.

After having observed and been around water for a long time, always in vain,
lapping water that murmured on the bank, in front of his paws, he risked
on the overturned tree that served as a bridge for his parents. Arrived without
gets in the way, and without having lost his balance, on the other bank, he
It seemed as if he was suddenly transported into a new world. He hesitated
a few more moments, then bravely set off.

He had not traveled more than fifty yards when he
heard the beating of wings near him. It was a whiskey jack, which
was precisely in his path.

The bird could no longer fly. One of its wings was dragging on the ground,
probably broken during a fight with one of the little beasts
of Wild prey. He nevertheless appeared, first of all, in Bari, as
one of the most disturbing and exciting living things to
times there was.

On the grayish line of his back, the hair soon stood up and
the wolf cub advanced towards the bird.

The whiskey jack, which until then had remained motionless, began to beat
retreating, limping and hobbling, when he saw that Bari was not
only three feet away from him. But Bari, stripping away his indecision,
rushed quickly towards the wounded bird, uttering a sharp and irritated _yip_.
There was a brief and exciting chase, and the little teeth
The cub's sharp ears buried themselves in the feathers.

Then the bird's beak began to knock. The whiskey jack is
the scarecrow of the feathered little people. In the nesting season, there
kills, with its hard beak, the young of the bush sparrows, those of
elk birds, with sweet eyes, and those even of these winged sappers of
the forest called woodpeckers.

The big jay beat incessantly on Bari's snout. But the son of
Kazan was big enough to no longer shy away from battle, and the
The pain he felt from the pecks only resulted in him
sink his teeth further. They ended up finding the
flesh and a growl of childish joy rolled from it into his throat.

The resistance of the whiskey-jack, from that moment, began to weaken, and
soon the bird stopped hitting and struggling. Bari loosened his
hugged and leaned back slightly. He looked at the bird that lay in front
him, motionless and shaggy. The whiskey jack was dead.

The cub had won his first battle and immense pride in
was born in him. He was no longer a parasite of the Wild. He had
makes its debut in the relentless mechanism of wild life. He had
kill.

An hour later, Gray Wolf, who had followed his trail, found him at the
same place. There was nothing left of the big jay except shreds; his
Feathers were scattered everywhere on the ground. As for Bari, the muzzle
all bloody, he had, to rest, lying triumphant in front of
debris from his victim.

Gray Wolf understood and stroked her wolf cub. She brought him back with her
and in his mouth he brought to his father a wing of the vanquished bird.

Hunting, from then on, became the dominant passion of Bari. When he
did not sleep in the sun or, at night, in the hollow of the tree, he
was looking for anything that had life and that he could destroy.

He massacred an entire family of wood mice. THE
elkbirds, which he watched on the lookout, were also a
easy prey and, in a few days, he managed to kill three of them. He was,
on the other hand, less happy with an ermine, which bit him cruelly and
who escaped, unscathed, thus making him experience his first defeat.

For several days he remained very sad about this defeat and he
kept quieter. But he had learned that, among the beasts of
Wild, it was advisable to be careful with those who, like him, wore
Crocs. And, more generally, he knew that it was not
those that it was appropriate to make one's food. Having, in fact,
met, some time later, with a fishing cat, who was like
him in search of food, he let him go his way, without him
say nothing. And the fishing cat, no less circumspect, did the same.

Other notions were innate in him. Instinctively he knew, before
even to have experienced the burning wound, that it was necessary
to avoid contact with the porcupine.

The cub races became more and more distant and more
long absences. Gray Wolf, at first, was worried when her
son was taking too long to return to the lodge. Now she cared
less. The law of Nature was taking its course.

Then came an afternoon when Bari moved away even more than the others
days. He killed a rabbit, was satisfied with it and remained where he was until
dusk.

Then the full moon rose, huge and golden, flooding with light
which almost rivaled the light of day plains, forests and ridges
of mountains. It was a superb night. And Bari discovered the moon, and he
set off in its marvelous glow, continuing to turn the
back to the family cottage.

All night, Gray Wolf stayed up, waiting for her son. When reappeared
During the day, she sat on her behind and, raising her eyes to the sky
blind, she let out a long howl.

In the distance, Bari heard him, but did not respond. Its evolution was
finished. Nature had finally regained its rights. A world
new and a new life definitely opened up for the
Cub. He had said goodbye to his father and mother.




XXI

BROKENTOOTH EMIGRATES WITH HIS FAMILY


The beauty of the season where spring ends and summer begins
acted similarly on Kazan and Gray Wolf. Thirst took them
also to get back on the road and go wandering through the vast
world. This pleasure of wandering infallibly takes the animals back
furs and fanged beasts of the Wild, as soon as the young of the
reach of spring, to go their way, left them.

On a wonderful night, bathed in moon and stars, the wolfdog and
the blind wolf in turn abandoned the hollow tree and undertook
to go up, towards the western mountains, the valley which led to the
swamp.

Day and night they hunted, marking their trail behind them,
countless half-eaten carcasses of rabbits and partridges.
It was, in fact, the season for the pleasure of killing and not that of hunger.

Ten miles to the west, they killed a young fawn. They abandoned him
also, after a single meal. For a long time they warmed themselves in the sun
and became more and more shiny and greasy.

They found little discomfort with other animals. There was no
lynx in the region, insufficiently wooded to please the big cat, nor
of wolves. Fishing cats, martens and mink abounded along the
torrent, but were not dangerous. One day they met a
old otter. He was, of his kind, a giant of the species, whose
The hair was turning, with the approaching summer, to a dirty gray.

Kazan, lazy and sated, looked at her carelessly. Gray Wolf sniffed
in the air the strong smell of fish that the beast gave off. This being
aquatic interest them no more than a stick that would have gone to
the drift, along the water. They continued on their way without suspecting
that this big, stupid-looking creature with a pitch-black tail
coal, would soon become their ally in one of these battles
hateful and merciless, as is the case between the hosts of the Wild.
Tragic struggles, which end with the survival of the strongest,
and whose only witnesses are the impassive and mute sky, where their
memory spreads to the winds.

No man had come to this part for several years.
upper part of the valley and a colony of beavers thrived there in peace.

The head of the colony was a venerable patriarch, that an Indian, in his
colorful language, would not have failed to christen it “Broken Tooth”. Because one of the
four long incisors, which beavers use to cut down
the trees intended for the construction of their dikes, was broken at
the old father.

It had been six years since Brokentooth arrived in this place, with
some other beavers of his age, and which they had together built
their first dike and their first hut.

The following April, Brokentooth's female gave him four babies.
beavers and each of the other mother beavers had similarly increased
the population of the small colony of two, three or four members
new.

If this first generation had followed the ordinary law of the species,
she would have, after four years, matched with each other and would have
left the colony to found another. But she found herself
well where she was and remained there. She procreated on the spot. So that
now one would have said the tight swarming of the population which
piles up in a besieged city.

The colony, this sixth year, had fifteen huts and more than a hundred
citizens, with, in addition, the last litter of young beavers from March
and April. The dike which held back the waters of the torrent had lengthened
to the point of reaching two hundred yards. The overflowing water covered a vast
expanse of ground, transformed into a pond, and from which birch trees emerged,
poplars, alders and willows, with tender bark and green shoots.

Whatever the surface covered by the water, this ordinary pittance
beavers had become insufficient for the food of the lodges
overcrowded. We only saw gnawed trees and shrubs everywhere.
down to the sapwood.

Restrained, like man, by the love of the native home, the beavers
had not yet been able to decide to emigrate. Brokentooth Hut
internally measured eight to nine feet in diameter, and in this
narrow space lived children and grandchildren, numbering
twenty seven.

So the old patriarch had resolved to abandon his tribe, to
go elsewhere to seek their fortune. While Kazan and Gray Wolf
carelessly sniffed the strong odors exhaled by the city of
beavers, Brokentooth justly rallied and arranged around him
his family--that is to say his female, two of his sons and their
offspring--for the exodus.

Brokentooth had always been the recognized leader of the colony. None
no other beaver had ever reached its size and strength. His body
thick was a good three feet long and weighed around sixty pounds.
Its flat tail measured five inches wide, fourteen inches long and,
when it struck the water, on a calm night, one could, a mile away
from a distance, hear the resonance of the blow. His hind legs,
widely webbed, were twice as big as those of its female
and no swimmer in the colony could compete in speed with him.

The night that followed, while Kazan and Gray Wolf continued their
running along the stream, Brokentooth came out of the water, climbed onto the
dike, shook himself and looked to see if all his smalah was online.

The water of the pond, which, under the clear night, was all pitted
of stars, rippled, behind him, with bodies swimming and
came to join him on the dike. A few other beavers had
joined him and his family. When everyone was gathered, the worthy
patriarch plunged his head into the torrent, on the side opposite the pond, and
the silky and shiny bodies of the emigrants began to descend the
fluent. The three-month-old babies swam like their parents and
had great difficulty not letting themselves be left behind. Brokentooth split
water, the first, superbly. Behind him came the beavers
adults. Mothers and children formed the rearguard. There was
forty heads in total.

Throughout the night, the journey continued without incident. The big
otter, hidden in a thick clump of willows, left, without attacking
to her, pass the caravan.

By a curious foresight of Nature, which often sees beyond
our human understanding, the otter is the deadly enemy of
race of beavers and more formidable for it than is man himself.
A fish eater, she at the same time ensures that the species does not
is not destroyed. A secret instinct undoubtedly taught him that
dikes raised by the beaver, cutting off the natural flow of rivers and
torrents, hinder the natural course of the fish at the time of
spawning. Unable to compete alone against the numerous tribes
of her enemies, she works, in silence, to destroy their works.
How she goes about it is what we will see later.

Several times during the night, Brokentooth had stopped swimming to
examine the bank, see if there were enough trees there
tender bark and decide if it was appropriate to stop. But here these
barks were insufficiently numerous. This was the place that
was not conducive to the construction of a dike, and we know that
the beavers' engineering instinct even outweighs the attraction of
food.

The whole troop relied, on this point, on the judgment of
Broken Tooth, which she did not discuss, and no one thought of
to remain behind while he continued to advance.

At the first light of dawn, we arrived at the part of the marsh where Kazan and
Gray Wolf had taken up residence. By right of the first occupant, the
land of the islet and that which neighboring it belonged without contest
to the wolfdog and the she-wolf. Everywhere they had left marks of
their influence.

But Brokentooth was an aquatic creature and its scent, which
Besides, he wasn't very smart, didn't care about terrestrial creatures.
He stopped right in front of the hollow tree that had served as a shelter for
Gray Wolf and Kazan, and climbed onto the bank. There he stood all
straight on its hind legs and, leaning on its broad and heavy
tail, began to waddle as a sign of contentment.

The location was ideal for establishing a colony. By cutting from a dike
the torrent, a little below the islet, it would easily be
flooded, with its supply of poplars, alders, willows and
birches. A curtain of thick trees cut the wind, on the north side, and
promised mild temperatures for the winter.

Brokentooth immediately made the troop understand that it was here that he
was appropriate to settle down. It was who would hurry to climb the islet and
the banks facing it. The baby beavers began
incontinently nibbling on the bark that fell into their mouths. THE
adult beavers, after a few bites, set to work without further ado
delay and, under the direction of Brokentooth, began, the same day,
their work as builders.

Brokentooth, having set his sights on a large birch tree which rose in
edge of the torrent, undertook to cut it at the base. Despite
his lost tooth, the old patriarch knew how to make good use of the three which
remained to him and which age had not deteriorated.

The beaver's teeth are sharp like so many steel scissors. A
hard enamel, which never flakes, covers them externally. On the side
interior, they are formed of a softer ivory which, gradually
measure of its wear, is renewed from year to year.

Sitting on his hindquarters, his front paws resting against the
tree throne, and well balanced on its tail, where it braced itself,
Broken Tooth cut a ring around the trunk, which gradually went into
thinning. He worked for several hours and when finally he
stopped to rest, another worker set to work.

Other adult beavers, meanwhile, were cutting down smaller trees.
It was a small poplar which, with a great crash, fell first
in water.

The large birch which, at the base, took the hollow shape of an hourglass was
longer to bring down. Twenty hours were needed. So he
fell across the stream, exactly where he had been
assigned.

During the week that followed, the tribe took very little
rest. If the beaver, in principle, prefers to work at night, it
also adapts, if necessary, to working during the day.

With almost human intelligence, the little engineers were
set to their task. Many young trees were felled and
cut into lengths of four to five feet. These logs were
then rolled up to the stream, the beavers nudging them with their heads and
legs, and came up against the big birch, interspersed with
brush and small branches, which played the role of fascines.

When the framework of the dike was thus completed, the cementing
began. Beavers, on this point, are the masters of men and, this
they build, only dynamite can blow it up.

Triturating, and bringing under their chin folded in the shape of a pocket, a
mixture of mud and half-pound to one-pound plant twigs
by loading, they studied to close, using this mortar, all
the voids that remained in their framework, between the trunks and the
fascinates.

It seemed like a colossal task. But the manufacturers of
Brokentooth could, in twenty-four hours, transport a ton of
their cement. After the third day, the barrage began to
to function, the water to rise, and the torrent to spread to the right and to
LEFT.

This now made the work easier and the materials
construction were maneuvered more easily, the beavers making them
float on water. The logs piled up one after the other
others and the dike was not long in extending over a length of one
hundred feet.

The tribe had reached this point with their work when, one fine morning, Kazan and Louve
Grise returned to their home.




XXII

THE FIGHT AGAINST INVADERS


As the two were still half a mile apart, a breeze
light, which blew from the south, brought to Gray Wolf's nostrils the smell
intruders.

With her shoulder, as a sign of warning, she bumped into Kazan who, at his
turn, smelled the strange odor in the air. This only continued to grow
as they advanced.

About two hundred yards from the beavers, they heard the cracking
suddenly of a falling tree and the sound of water as it fell.
They stopped abruptly and, for a good minute, they remained
tense nerves, and listening. Then they heard new
splashing in the water, accompanied by piercing screams.

Gray Wolf turned her blind eyes towards Kazan. Better than him, she
knew what it was about and she wished she could tell him.

They resumed their little trot forward. When they arrived where they
had left an islet, surrounded by a little water, and the hollow tree which
had sheltered for so long, Kazan experienced limitless bewilderment
in the face of the prodigious change which had taken place during their absence.
A pond covered the ground, flooding trees and bushes.

Kazan and Gray Wolf had advanced without making any noise and the
Brokentooth workers had no idea of ​​their presence.
Brokentooth himself was busy undermining a tree. Near him,
four or five baby beavers were having fun building a dam in
miniature, with mud and small branches. On the big dike,
other beaver children, a little older but not yet adults,
climbed, then had a wild time letting themselves slide on their
slope, like a slide, to finally tumble into the water. It was
their splashes! and their little joyful cries that Kazan and Gray Wolf
had heard.

Adult beavers were at work in various locations.

Kazan had already witnessed similar scenes when, in the game
upper part of the valley, he had passed near the first colony of the
beavers. It hadn't interested him then.

It was no longer the same today. The beavers had ceased to be
for him simple aquatic animals, tough and inedible, and
which exuded an unpleasant odor. They were the invaders of his
domain, therefore enemies, and its fangs were bared in silence. Her
his spine became like a brush, the muscles of his front legs, and those of
his shoulders tensed like whip ropes and, without throwing a single
single cry, he rushed towards Broken-Tooth.

The old patriarch had not foreseen the danger which threatened him.
He only saw Kazan a few seconds before the wolfdog had him.
reached. He stopped sawing his tree; but, slow to move on the
dry land, he seemed to hesitate for a moment. Kazan was already on him
when he let himself tumble towards the torrent.

There was a quick melee between the beaver and his attacker. But
Brokentooth slid like oil under Kazan's belly and
soon found himself safely in his element, with two raw bites
in his fleshy tail.

Kazan remained greatly stunned by the failure of his attack and the flight of
his elusive enemy. Astounded and appalled by the spectacle they
had just witnessed, the baby beavers which were on the bank
remained frozen in place. They only woke up when they saw the
wolfdog that swooped down on them.

Three, out of five of them, had time to return to the water. For
the other two babies, it was too late. With a simple snap of
jaws, Kazan broke the back of one. He grabs the other by the throat and
shook it in the air, like a burrow made of a rat.

Gray Wolf, who had heard the brief battle, came to join her
companion. She sniffed the two tender little bodies, which had stopped
to live, and began to groan. No doubt the two cute creatures
did they remind him of his own cubs, those that the lynx had
strangled on the Sun Rock, and Bari who had fled, because there was
in her moan a sort of maternal tenderness.

But if Gray Wolf had sentimental visions of this kind, he would not
was not the same for Kazan. The wolfdog showed up too
coldly merciless to two of the little creatures who had invaded
his domain as the lynx had done for the first litter of Louve
Grey. This success won over his enemies excited him even more.
desire to kill. He walked alongside, prey to a sort of frenzy, the edge of the
the pond, growling at the troubled water, under which
Brokentooth was gone.

The entire tribe had similarly taken refuge in the liquid element,
whose surface rose with the passage of all these bodies swimming between
two waters.

Kazan thus arrived at one end of the dam. It was new
for him. But instinct taught him that this work was the work
of Brokentooth and his tribe. For a few moments he persisted
furiously against the logs and against the intertwined twigs.

Suddenly, some fifty feet from the bank, towards the center of the
dike, the water stirred and the big round head of Brokentooth emerged.

During half a minute of mutual tension, the beaver and the wolfdog
measured each other with their eyes. Then, quietly, Brokentooth came out
out of the water, her wet and glistening body, climbed to the top of the dike, and
lay flat on his stomach, facing Kazan.

The old engineer was alone. No other beavers showed themselves anymore.
The surface of the pond was now without a wrinkle.

In vain, Kazan tried to discover a passage allowing him to arrive
up to his enemy, who seemed to taunt him. But, between the solid wall
of the central dike and the bank, there was only a frame to
clerestory, through which the water passed bubbling, like
through the half-closed gates of a lock.

Three times, Kazan persisted in making his way through this
tangle of branches and, three times, his efforts only resulted in
a sudden plunge into the pond.

The old patriarch, meanwhile, still did not move. When,
finally, discouraged Kazan had abandoned his attack, Brokentooth allowed himself
sliding over the edge of the dike and disappeared under the water. The evil beaver
had learned that, no more than the lynx, Kazan was capable of
fight in the water and he went to spread this good news among the
other members of the tribe.

Kazan came to join Gray Wolf. He lay down next to her, in the sun,
and began to observe again.

After half an hour, he saw, on the opposite bank, Brokentooth who
came out of the water again. Other beavers followed him and all
went back to their work, as if nothing had happened. THE
some began sawing their trees again, others worked in
the pond, bringing with them and putting in place their loads of cement
and twigs. The middle of the pond was their death line. Not one
did not exceed it.

A dozen times one of the beavers swam up to this line and
stopped, looking at the little bodies that Kazan had killed and which
remained on the bank. No doubt it was the mother who had
wanted to go towards the innocent victims and did not dare.

Kazan, who had calmed down a little, reflected on these strange beings
that he had before him, and which used both the earth and
the water. They were not fit for combat and, although there were many of them,
against him alone, they fled like rabbits as soon as he was
reach of reaching them. Against him, Brokentooth, in their bodies
body, hadn't even used his teeth.

He came to conclude that these invasive creatures must be
hunted on the prowl, like rabbits and partridges. By virtue of which,
he set off during the afternoon, followed by Louve
Grey.

By a customary trick of wolves, he began by moving away from the
coveted prey and first went up the course of the torrent. The level y
had risen considerably, due to the effect of the beaver dam, and
numerous fords, which he had crossed many times, had become
impractical.

So he decided, after a mile, to swim across the stream,
leaving behind Gray Wolf who was held back by her horror of water
to the shore. Then he silently went back down the opposite bank,
standing about a hundred yards from the torrent.

A little short of the dike, alders and willows formed a thick thicket.
Kazan took advantage of this. He was able to advance without being seen and flattened himself on the
ground, ready to take off as soon as the opportunity presented itself.

For now, most of the tribe's members worked in
the water. Only four or five were on the bank. He was going to jump
on them when, at the last moment, he decided to advance a little further
towards the dike. He was well hidden in his thicket and the wind was for
him. The sound of the water, which gushed in cascades through the
skylights of the dam, muffled the sound of his footsteps.

The dam was, on this bank, still unfinished and, a few feet
only from the bank, Brokentooth was hard at work with his
workers. The old beaver was so busy, busy that he was
put in place a log, the size of a man's arm, that it does not
I didn't see Kazan's head and shoulders emerge from the bushes.

It was another beaver which, immediately plunging its head into the water,
shouted the warning, Brokentooth raised his head and his eyes
met the bared fangs of Kazan. It was too late. Already
Kazan, risking himself on the lying trunk of a small birch, was sure
him. His long fangs sank deep into the neck of his
enemy.

But the old friend had more than one trick up his sleeve. Rejecting oneself in
rear, with a sudden movement, he managed to make Kazan lose
the balance. Simultaneously, its teeth, sharp as scissors,
managed a solid hold on the wolfdog's throat. Mutually
riveted thus to one another, the two beasts made a wave in the wave
noisy dive.

Broken-Tooth, as we have said, weighed around sixty pounds. Of
the moment he was in the pond, he found himself in his element and,
clinging stubbornly to Kazan's throat, he let himself sink
melts, like a piece of lead, dragging his opponent with him.

Green water rushed into Kazan's mouth, into his ears,
in his eyes and in his nose. He was blinded and suffocated. All his
senses were in tumult. But, instead of struggling to free yourself
as quickly as possible, he persisted in not letting go of Brokentooth, holding back his
breathing and tightening his fangs further.

Soon he touched the soft, muddy bottom of the pond, and began to
sink into the mud.

Then he panicked and understood that life or death was at stake for him.
dead. He abandoned Brokentooth, only to think of closing
seal its jaws, so as not to be suffocated by the water.
And with all the strength of his mighty limbs he struggled to free himself.
of his enemy, to return to the surface, towards the open air and towards the
life.

The enterprise which, on earth, would have been easy, was here terribly
uncomfortable. The grip of the old beaver was, under water, more formidable
for him than that of a lynx in the open air. Height of misfortune! A second
beaver, adult and robust, arrived, in an eddy of water. If he
joined with Brokentooth, Kazan was over. But fate had it
decided otherwise.

The old patriarch was not vindictive. He was not thirsty, nor for blood,
nor death. Now that he was free from the strange enemy who, two
time, had thrown herself at him and who now could no longer make him
no harm, he had no reason to keep Kazan underwater. He
loosened his little mouth.

It wasn't too early for Bari's father, already three-quarters
drowned. However, he managed to rise to the surface and, hanging on to his
front paws on a small tree in the dam, he held his head
out of the water, for a good ten minutes, until he had absorbed
sufficient breaths of air and regained the strength to regain the
shore.

He was devastated. Soaked as he had never been, he was shivering
of all its members. Its jaws hung low. He had been beaten,
beaten, beaten to the punch. And its winner was an animal of
race inferior to his own. He felt all the humiliation of it.
Lamentable and barely able to drag himself along, he went up the course of the
torrent, which he had to swim back across to find
Gray Wolf waiting for him.




XXIII

THE OTTER MAKES A GAP


A few days later, Kazan had regained its customary strength and beauty.
health. But his hatred for the cursed beavers had only gotten worse.
Destroying his enemies had become a fixed idea for him and one that
passionately shook the brain.

The dam took on increasingly formidable proportions. THE
cementing of the dike extended deeper underwater, through the
constant and prompt care from four-legged engineers. Three huts
rose. Every twenty-four hours, the water rose higher and
regularly the pond widened, submerging everything.

Constantly on the lookout, as soon as the hunt and the worry for food
for him and for Gray Wolf did not hold him back, Kazan did not stop
prowling around the pond looking for a favorable opportunity to
kill one of the careless members of the Brokentooth tribe.

This is how he surprised a large beaver, which had strayed too far onto the
bank, and strangled him. Three days later, it was the turn of two babies
beavers, which were frolicking in the mud, a few feet from the shore.
Kazan, in his fury, literally tore them to pieces.

So Brokentooth decided that we would only work at night.
and that, during the day, the whole tribe would remain in their huts. Kazan does not
lost point. He was a skilled nocturnal hunter and, two nights of
Next, he killed his beaver. He already had seven pieces on the board when
the otter entered the scene.

Never had Brokentooth been placed between two enemies more
relentless and more ferocious than those who now attacked him. On
land, Kazan was his master and that of his race, through agility
superior which was his, by his more subtle sense of smell and his tricks
of fight. The otter, in the water, was a worse threat.

She evolved there, faster than the fish from which she made her
food. Its sharp teeth were like steel needles.
It was so smooth and shiny and slippery that the beavers, so
many people after her would have been incapable of preventing her from
slip through their legs.

No more than the beaver, the otter has a thirst for blood. And yet, in
all of Northland, she is the worst destroyer of these animals. She
is a real plague for them.

It is especially during the extreme cold of winter that it accomplishes its
most formidable work. She's not going to attack the beavers in
their warm huts. But, and man does the same with the help of
dynamite, she will make a hole in the dike under the ice.
The water immediately begins to descend, the ice collapses in masses
chaotic and the huts remain dry. The beavers soon arrive
freezing to death. Because, despite their thick fur, these animals
are very sensitive to low temperatures, which reach, during
Canadian winter, forty to fifty degrees below zero. There
protection of water and ice from outside air is for them
as necessary as fire is to man.

For two days, the otter frolicked around the dike and the water
depth of the pond. Kazan took her for a beaver and tried in vain to
hunt on the lookout. The otter, for its part, looked at Kazan with suspicion.
and kept carefully out of his reach. Neither one nor the other
recognized as allies.

The beavers continued their work with redoubled caution, but
without abandoning it for a minute. The water was still rising.

On the third day, the otter's destructive instinct decided to
operate. She dove in and, searching everywhere with her little head, she began
to examine the dike near its foundations. It didn't take long to
discover a weak point, where logs, branches and cement
formed a less homogeneous whole and, with its small sharp teeth, it
began its drilling operations.

Inch by inch, digging and gnawing before her, she carved out a
path in the dike. The little round opening that she made
measured about seven inches in diameter. After six hours of
work, the dike was completely breached.

Then, through this overflow, the water rushed, like that of a
barrel which empties through its bung. Kazan saw the otter, satisfied with his
work, get out of the water, climb on the dike and shake off there. In one
half an hour, the level of the pond had already suffered a perceptible drop
and, due to the effect of the water pressure, the leak hole widened
of himself.

In another half hour the three cabins were dry and the mud
on which they rested appeared.

It was only then that Brokentooth began to become alarmed.
Panicked, he rallied the colony around him, which was struggling
right and left, and swam wildly in all directions, without
no longer worry about the wolfdog and the she-wolf. A large beaver having
approached on their side, Kazan, immediately followed by Gray Wolf, was on him,
in two leaps. The fight was brief and cruel, and the beavers saw their
brother quickly strangled. So they all rushed to the shore
opposite.

Brokentooth, however, escorted by his best workers, had plunged
in what remained of the water at the base of the dike and looked for the breach,
in order to close it as quickly as possible. The otter, in the meantime, had
eclipsed.

The work to be done was difficult, because the beavers had to,
after trimming them to the proper size, drag them through the
vase of logs and fascines. It was necessary, moreover, in this struggle for
life, to bare the fangs of Kazan and Gray Wolf, who
splashed in the mud, moving as far from the shore as they could
could, and who were panting from carnage. Five other adult beavers and
a baby beaver fell under their blows during the afternoon, and
were torn to pieces.

Broken Tooth finally managed to close the breach, the water began to rise again
and the massacre ended.

The big otter, going up the stream, had gone half a mile
from there, rest from his work. Spread out on a stump, she
heated by the last rays of the setting sun. His intention was,
the next day, to go back down towards the dike and renew its
hole. It was her customary method and her own amusement.

But this strange and invisible referee of the Wild, the one that the Indians
call O-se-ki, "the Spirit", finally condescended to cast a glance
pity on Brokentooth and his unfortunate tribe.

Seeing the pond full again, Kazan and Gray Wolf began
also, to go up the torrent, in search of new beavers to
kill, if by chance he had strayed that way.

The otter was, as we said, big and gray and old. During
ten years she had lived, to prove to man that she was more
Madder than him. In vain, many a hunter had set out his traps to
capture her. In the current of streams and torrents, corridors
perfidious had been, by clever trappers, cleverly established at
with the help of logs and large stones, at the end of which she was waiting
jaws of steel. She had always discovered these traps.

Few of those who hunted her had seen her. But the track she
left in the mud or gravel revealed its large size. If she
had not been able to defend her like this, her splendid and soft fur
winter would have long ago taken the route of the most luxurious stores
from Europe. Because this fur was truly worthy of a duke or a
duchess, king or emperor. For ten years she had known
live and escape the lusts of the rich.

But, on this beautiful summer evening, she was without mistrust. It would not have been
found a single hunter to kill her, because at that time her skin was
of no value. Instinct and Nature told him this. It is
why, numbed both by the good sun and by fatigue,
her stomach well stocked with a batch of fish that she was in the process of
digest, she slept voluptuously, in complete serenity, flattened on
its stump, near the torrent.

With velvet steps, Kazan arrived, followed by Gray Wolf. The wind, that they
had for them, did not betray them and he soon brought them
the smell of the otter.

They found it to be that of an aquatic animal, a rancid smell,
smelling of fish, and they had no doubt that they were going
encounter one of their broad-tailed enemies. They redoubled
cautiously and arrived, without being heard, in front of the otter. Kazan
stopped abruptly and, as a warning, bumped his shoulder into the
blind wolf.

The final dip of the sun through the trees had faded and the
Dusk was beginning to fall. In the darkening wood, a
owl greeted the night of its first call, with muffled notes. The otter
was agitated on his stump. A sort of unease took hold of her and her
mustachioed muzzle twitched. She was ready to wake up when
Kazan lunged at her.

Face to face, in a frank battle, the otter could still have defended itself
and prove its worth. But the Wild had decreed, this time, that she
had to die. O-se-ki, the immanent and all-powerful Spirit,
weighed on her. He was more formidable than the man and her
had no way of escaping him.

Kazan's fangs sank into the otter's jugular vein and
she died instantly, before even knowing who she was.
had jumped on it. As for the wolf-dog and the she-wolf, they resumed
their rounds, always looking for beavers to slaughter, and without
doubt that by killing the otter they had eliminated the only ally who
would have, in the long run, ended up making the common enemy evacuate the swamp.

The situation, for them, only got worse. Brokentooth and his
tribe, now that there were no more otters, had a good time
continue their construction. They did not fail to do so and, in
July, the almost entire depression occupied by the marsh was
deep underwater.

Kazan and Gray Wolf were frightened by this uncontrollable power.
which reminded them of that of man. By a big white moon and
round, they abandoned their old domain, went up the torrent
without stopping throughout the night, until the first colony of beavers, of which
they hastened to turn away, and continued their journey towards the
north.




XXIV

CAPTURING


The fire that Kazan and Gray Wolf had miraculously escaped
was not the only one who, that year, devastated the Northland. Others
fires, accidentally lit by the imprudence of Indians or
of white men, added their scourge to the excessive frost of winter, to the
famine and the Red Death, and devastated, in July and August,
entire regions.

Kazan and Gray Wolf soon reached forests devastated by the
flame, that the east winds, coming from Hudson Bay, had
stoked, and where every trace of life, every green vestige had disappeared. THE
soft pads of their paws only treading stumps
scorched logs, charred logs and blackened ground. The blind wolf
could see the dark world in which they lived, but she felt it
nostrils.

Faced with this infinite desolation, Kazan seemed to hesitate on the road ahead.
follow. Despite his hatred of men, he would have preferred to go back down to
South. Because it is in the south that civilization and the instinct of the dog are
always brings him back, despite himself, in that direction. The instinct of
wolf, on the contrary, always pushes it towards the north, and it is towards the
north that Gray Wolf claimed to go.

It was she who ultimately won. The couple continued to move
on this side, towards Lake Athabasca and the sources of the Mac-Farlane River.

Towards the end of the previous fall, a gold prospector had arrived in
Fort Smith, on Great Slave Lake[34], with a mason jar
filled with gold dust and nuggets. He had made this precious
harvest in the Mac-Farlane River. The news spread quickly
peddled to the civilized world and, in mid-winter, the vanguard of a
horde of treasure seekers had rushed, hastily, on their
snowshoes and dog sleds.

  [34] Great Slave Lake extends north of Lake Athabasca,
    between the sixtieth degree and the Arctic Circle. It measures, from
    east to west, approximately 500 kilometers.

Gold finds multiplied. The Mac-Farlane was rich in
glitter, small and large, that one only had to pick up in one's
water, mixed with sand and gravel. The prospectors, as soon as they arrived,
hastened to demarcate, all along the river, their fields
of exploitation and immediately got to work. The latecomers
went a little further. And the rumor spread throughout
Northland, that the harvest of yellow metal was even more abundant than
on the banks of the Yukon[35].

  [35] The Yukon, or Yakou, after flowing from south to north, like the
    Mackenzie, makes a bend towards the west and will throw itself into the Sea of
    Behring, in the Territory of Alaska. The two rivers are
    separated from each other by the Rocky Mountain range.

The influx of gold hunters increased. Of around twenty they were at
At first they became a hundred, then five hundred, then a thousand. A lot
came from the south and the prairie country, abandoning the more
exploited in Saskatchewan. The others came from the Far North[36] and from
Klondike, by the Rocky Mountains and the Mackenzie River. These
were the most seasoned and rugged adventurers, who
feared neither death from cold nor death from hunger.

  [36] The _Far North_ or the Far North.

Among them was Sandy Mac Trigger.

For many reasons, Sandy had deemed it better to move away from
Yukon. He was in trouble with the police who patrolled the
region and, what's more, his pocket was empty.

He was one of the best prospectors who had sought his fortune on
this distant land. He had collected gold worth one or two million
of dollars. But he had drunk or lost all his winnings gambling. It was, at
remaining, a roué, without any conscience, and who feared neither God
nor Devil.

His face was brutal and bestial. His galoshed jaw, his eyes
bulging, his low forehead and the tuft of red hair, already pulling towards
the gray, which adorned his skull, gave him a less than reassuring appearance.
Just by looking at him, anyone understood that it was unwise to
trust him, beyond the range of sight or a rifle bullet.

He was strongly suspected of killing two men and emptying
the pockets of many others. But, each time, the proof had
missed and the police were never able to catch him in the act. Her
His composure and self-control were extraordinary. His worst
enemies did him justice on this level and could not help but
nor to admire his tenacity and his courage.

In six months, Red Gold City[37] had grown to the edges of the
Mac-Farlane, one hundred and fifty miles distant from Fort Smith, which is
itself five hundred miles from any civilization.

  [37] The City of Red Gold.

When Sandy Mac Trigger arrived, he quickly went around
the rudimentary set of barracks, log cabins, houses of
gambling and bars of which the new town was made up, and risked gambling
a few coins he had left. Luck favored him sufficiently
to enable him to renew his food supplies and his
equipment.

Besides a small canoe, the main piece of equipment was an old
rifle, with an antediluvian mechanism, and which he could not help but
laugh while buying it, he who had handled so many modern weapons and
magnificent. But that was all the state of his finances had for him.
permit to acquire.

Then leaving Red Gold City where congestion and crowds were at hand.
their height, he resolved to go down towards the south, in his canoe,
going up the Mac-Farlane towards its source, beyond the point where the
gold prospectors had stopped exploring the river bed. It was there
only that he began his research.

While prospecting a small tributary, he indeed found gold. He would have
was able to collect it for six to eight dollars a day. But he shrugged
disdainfully raised his shoulders and began his exploration again.

Patiently he continued it, always going up the river, for
Several weeks. He found nothing. After such bad luck, he
It would have been dangerous to meet him. But he was alone, in a
desert. He couldn't hurt anyone.

One afternoon, he landed with his boat on a sandy bank
white, which bordered the river. The first thing that struck his sight,
the damp sand, were animal footprints. These were
two. Together and side by side, they had gone down to the water, to
drink. The prints were recent and only an hour or so old.
two.

Curiosity flashed in Sandy's eyes. He looked around.

--Wolves! he grumbled. Gladly, to relax a little
nerves, I would shoot them with this old gun, which operates at a
stroke per minute. Good God! Listen to them scream... And in broad daylight
Again!

He jumped to the ground.

A quarter of a mile away, Gray Wolf had felt in the wind the
dangerous smell of man. Kazan had moved away from her, a few
minutes before, to chase a white rabbit. Lying under a
thicket, while waiting for him, she had first heard the clicking of the
oars on the water, then the sound of the canoe scraping along the bank. SO
she had thrown her companion, as a warning, a long
plaintive howl. It was the first time since winter that a being
human was thus close to the wandering couple.

Mac Trigger waited until the last echo of the she-wolf's voice had
faded away. Then he took his old rifle from the boat,
put a new cartridge through the barrel and plunged into the
bushes that bordered the river.

Kazan quickly joined Gray Wolf and stood near her,
spine bristling. A breath of wind, infused with the scent of man
and which he inhaled, made him flinch.

Sandy had hunted foxes in the Arctic regions and, according to the
tactics that the Eskimos had taught him, he revolved around
his game until he found himself against the wind.

But Gray Wolf was even finer than the little-eyed fox.
Arctic reds. Its pointed snout slowly followed the evolution
Sandy circular. She heard, some three hundred yards away, a
dry branch cracking under the feet of the man, who was beginning to
bring closer. Then there was the metallic noise of the rifle, which hit the
trunk of a young birch. She pushed Kazan with her shoulder and they both
paraded, at a slow trot and in silence, in the opposite direction.

Sandy continued to crawl like a snake, but found nothing. After one
hour of vain hunting, he retraced his steps, towards the river and towards
the canoe. He uttered an oath and his evil face tightened. Both
The animals had, behind his back, returned to drink in the river. Of
new prints, all fresh, taught him, without anyone
possible doubt.

Then he began to laugh under his breath, while he took his
travel bag and took out a small rubber pouch from it.

From this pouch he took out a hermetically sealed bottle, which
contained small gelatin capsules. Each of them contained
five granules of strychnine.

On the banks of the Yukon, many dark things had been said in the
subject of these granules. It was assured that their owner had a
times, to try them, dropped one of them into a cup of
coffee which he offered to another man to drink. This also did not have
been proven.

What is certain is that Sandy Mac Trigger was, for his hunts,
a master in the use of poison. There are thousands of foxes whose
he had thus seized and he still sneered today, sinisterly,
thinking how easy it would be for him, by this means, to bring
reason this pair of wolves, so curious about him.

A few days earlier, he had killed a caribou which he had loaded
on his boat the best pieces. And, using sticks,
so that there was no smell of his fingers adhering to the bait, he
began to encompass in a little fat, then to roll up in
strips of skin, one of the deadly capsules.

Having repeated the same operation eight times, he left, a little before
sunset, put up the poison. He hung on
bushes part of the bait and sowed the others on various tracks of
rabbits and caribou. After which, he returned to his canoe and prepared the
supper.

The next morning he woke up early and left immediately,
in order to see the effects of his stratagem.

The first bait he pulled up was intact. The second was such
also that he had filed it. The third had disappeared.

Sandy rubbed her hands and had no doubt that, within a radius of two
or three hundred yards, he would find his game. But it was soon necessary
disillusioned. His gaze fell to the ground, a curse escaped
from his lips. Under the bush from a branch of which he had hung the
poisoned capsule, it was lying on the ground. The skin that
the envelope had been unrolled, but the capsule itself was intact
in fat.

It was the first time that such an adventure had happened to Sandy Mac.
Trigger. If a fox or a wolf found a bait tempting enough
to touch it once, it invariably followed that the bait was
eat. The gold prospector was unaware that Kazan had long been
familiar with all these tricks, which he had learned to know at
men.

He continued on his way.

The fourth and fifth baits were intact again. The sixth
had been stripped like the third and the white powder was, this
times, scattered on the ground. It was the same with the last two. He
there was no doubt, moreover, that this work was the work of
two mysterious wolves, whose eight legs had left
indisputable fingerprints.

MacTrigger's exasperation reached its peak. The bad mood
which had been accumulating in him over several weeks of useless work,
burst out into flares of anger and curses. She had found, in the
two wolves, responsible people towards whom to express themselves and relax.
He considered this new failure as the culmination of his bad
luck and judged that it was useless to push further. All was
ganged up on him and he decided to return to Red Gold City.

So as soon as he had finished lunch, Sandy MacTrigger pushed back
water his canoe and abandoned himself to the flow of the current. Lazily sitting
on his bench, as if in an armchair, he took out his pipe, filled it, and
began to smoke, using the oar only to govern his frail
skiff. He had put his old gun between his knees. Maybe,
along the way, he would discover, on one or the other bank of the river,
some game to shoot.

Towards the middle of the afternoon, Kazan and Gray Wolf who had,
their side, considered prudent to move away from poisoned bait and who, at
this effect, had descended the valley rapidly for five or six
thousand, were thirsty.

They went down to the bank of the river which, at this point, described a
sharp elbow. If the wind had been favorable or if Sandy had rowed,
Gray Wolf would not have failed to smell the approaching danger.
But the wind was blowing from the front and the boat was moving silently
along the water.

Only the click! click! metal of the rifle that Mac Trigger armed made him
prick up your ears. Instantly his hair bristled and, ceasing to
lapping up the cool water, she retreated hastily towards the bushes
which lined the shore. But Kazan, raising his head, remained on the
sand, in order to confront the enemy.

Almost immediately the canoe emerged from the bend in the river and Sandy
pressed the trigger.

There was a vomit of smoke and Kazan felt a burning jet which
hit on the head. He capsized backwards, his legs gave way under him
and he fell like an inert bundle.

At the sound of the detonation, Gray Wolf fled like a
line. Blind as she was, she had not seen Kazan fall
on the sand. It was only after having traveled nearly a mile,
far from the terrible thunder of the white man's gun, that she
stopped and noticed that her companion, whom she waited in vain, did not
hadn't followed her.

Sandy Mac Trigger had stopped his skiff and he jumped on the bank with
a howl of joy.

--All the same I got you, old devil! he shouted. And I would have had
the other too, if I had owned something other than the filth that
serves as a rifle!

With the butt of his weapon, he turned Kazan's head back and a quick
astonishment appeared on his face.

--Cré Dié! he said. It's not a wolf! It's a dog, Sandy Mac
Trigger! An authentic dog!




XXIV

THE SANDY MAC TRIGGER METHOD


Mac Trigger knelt on the sand, near his victim, who
still seemed inanimate. He lifted Kazan's head and quickly
not to discover the wear of the hair around the neck, as well as the calluses of the
skin, which indicated that the beast had worn the collar.

He couldn't believe his eyes.

--It's a dog! he exclaimed again. A dog, Sandy! And of all
beauty!

A pool of blood reddened the sand around Kazan's head. The man
examined the wound and tried to find the exact place where
the big round ball had carried.

She had reached the top of the head, but had not started the
skull, on which, on the contrary, it had deviated. There
injury, however violent the effect, was not serious and
the jolts of Kazan, who nervously shook his paws and his
spine, were not, as Mac Trigger had first feared,
the convulsions of agony. The wolfdog had no desire to die
and it was life coming back to him little by little.

Mac Trigger was a fine expert in sled dogs. In their
company he had spent two thirds of his life. At a glance,
he was able to tell for each of them the age of the beast, what it
was worth and where it came from. He could, on the snow, distinguish the
track of a Mackenzie dog from that of a malemute, the footprints
of an Eskimo dog from those of a Yukon husky.

So he examined Kazan's paws. They were wolf paws. Sandy
sneered. He was strong and powerful, and Sandy thought, apart from him, of the prices
raised that next winter the dogs would reach Red Gold City.

So he went to his canoe and brought back a piece of canvas, which he
stanched the blood from the wound, as well as a large supply of
strips of sinew, which he immediately began to make
a muzzle.

He carried it out by braiding together the finest of these strips, like
one made for the straps of a snowshoe. In ten minutes he
finished the muzzle, inserted Kazan's nose into it, and
Securely attached around the animal's neck. He made, with
other straps, a leash ten feet long. Then he sat down,
legs crossed, waiting for Kazan to come to.

It didn't take long. The wolfdog began by lifting its head and
looked around him. He saw nothing at first. A fog of
blood was on his eyes. Then his eyes cleared and he saw
the man.

His first movement was to stand up on his paws. Too weak to
standing up, he fell, three times, to the ground. The man, sitting
six feet away from him, holding the leash and giggling. The fangs of Kazan
discovered. He growled menacingly, and his back jerked, Sandy
MacTrigger got to his feet.

"Sure and certain, I know what you are plotting," he muttered.
Before you, I saw others of your kind. The damn wolves have you
made bad and you'll need a good amount of caning
before you decide to walk straight again. Do you want us to start
immediately the lesson? Listen a little...

Mac Trigger had taken care to bring a sturdy club from the canoe.
He picked it up from the sand, without letting go of the strap, which he held
the other hand.

Kazan had finally stood up. Before him he found Man, his
old enemy, and, in the hand of Man, the inseparable club. All
what there was in his nature of fierce ferocity awoke. He
knew that Gray Wolf was gone. The man who was there was
responsible. This same man had injured him and his club, he knew it
well, was about to strike.

So if suddenly he jumps that Mac Trigger, who nevertheless
suspicious, had no time to ward off the attack. Before he had lifted
his club or jumped aside, Kazan hit him right in the chest.

The muzzle alone saved Sandy's life. The fearsome jaw slammed,
without being able to bite. But he fell backwards, under the violence of the shock,
as if he had been hit by a catapult.

As agile as a cat, Sandy Mac Trigger immediately got back on his feet.
feet, still firmly holding the thong that held Kazan captive
and which he had wrapped several times around his wrist.

The wolfdog jumped again. But he encountered the furious reel of
club, which fell on his shoulder, with a well-applied blow, and
sent him rolling on the sand.

Before he could regain his senses, Mac Trigger, shortening
more the thong, was on him.

The club fell, in a terrible and precise rhythm, as could be
wait for it with a hand so practiced in its use. The first shots do not
only served to further increase Kazan's rage. But the one
of his adversary, half-mad with cruelty and anger, was not
lesser. Every time Kazan jumped, the stick caught him in midair,
with a violence capable of breaking his bones. The contracted mouth of
Sandy knew no mercy. He had never seen such a dog and,
muzzled as Kazan was, he was only half reassured about the outcome of
the battle. It was too obvious that if the muzzle were to break
or slipping, it was the end of him, without remission.

With this thought in mind, the man finally delivered such a formidable blow to
Kazan's head that the old wrestler fell to the ground, more
flaccid as a rag.

MacTrigger was out of breath. His chest heaved. In front of Kazan
defeated, he let his club slip from his hand and it was only
when he fully realized the desperate struggle he was facing
had to support.

He took advantage of the fact that the animal had lost consciousness to reinforce the
muzzle using new straps. Then he dragged Kazan to
a few steps further, up to a tree trunk that the waters had
washed up on the shore, and he fastened it there firmly. Then he shot
landed his skiff and began to prepare camp for the night.

When Kazan had regained his senses a little, he remained motionless and lying,
while observing his tormentor. Each of his bones ached.

Mac Trigger seemed very satisfied. Several times he returned to
the animal, in the company of the club, and reiterated. The third time he
poked Kazan with the end of the stick, which redoubled the fury of the
dog wolf. This was what Mac Trigger wanted. The process is ordinary
to trainers of unruly dogs. He forces them to surrender
realize the uselessness of their revolt. Then the blows started again
rain. So much so that Kazan ends up no longer facing man and
club, and took refuge, groaning, behind the tree trunk to which
he was tied up. He could barely drag himself. Would he have been free then
that he couldn't even have escaped.

Sandy had regained all her good humor.

--I will succeed, he said to Kazan for the twentieth time, in doing
bring out the evil devil in you. There is nothing like
beatings with sticks to teach dogs and women to live. Before a
months from now, you'll be ready and worth two hundred dollars, or I'll
I'll skin you alive!

On several more occasions, before nightfall, Sandy tried to
arouse Kazan's anger by poking him and prodding with the tip of his
club. But now the reaction was zero. Eyes closed and
head between his paws, he no longer even saw Mac Trigger. Mac Trigger
threw him a piece of meat under his nose for his dinner. He doesn't
didn't look any further.

Nor did he know when the sun had completely set in the west,
behind the forests, and did not see the night coming. There was a moment,
only, where he awoke from his stupor. In his doleful brain he
A familiar voice seemed to resonate, a voice from the past. He raised his head
and listened.

On the sand of the bank, he saw Mac Trigger who had established his fire.
The man had risen and stood in the reddish glow, turned
towards the darkness of the forest, and he too listened. He listened to this
same funeral cry which had revived Kazan, the lamentation of Gray Wolf,
which echoed in the distance.

Kazan got back on his feet and, groaning, began to pull on the
strap. Sandy jumped towards him after grabbing the club, which he
had kept within reach.

--Layer! Nasty animal! he ordered.

In the light of the fire the club rose and fell, fast and
fierce.

And when Mac Trigger returned to the hearth burning on the
sand, next to his blankets which he had spread out to sleep on, the
big stick had taken on a completely different appearance. He was now
covered in blood and hair.

--Certainly, Sandy monologued, that my method, in the long run,
will calm down. I will succeed...or I will kill him!

Several times during the night, Kazan heard the call of Gray Wolf.
He moaned very lowly, in response, for fear of the club. He had the
fever and suffered excruciating pain in his bloody flesh. He watched
burning the fire and his parched throat begged for a little water.

At the first light of dawn, the man came out from under his
blankets and brought meat and water to Kazan. He drank the water,
but continued to refuse meat. He no longer growled and discovered
no more his fangs. Sandy was pleased to see this improvement.

When the sun rose, Sandy had finished her morning breakfast and
was ready to leave. Without fear, and neglecting the club, he came
towards Kazan, untied him from the trunk of the tree and dragged him after him, on the
sand, towards the canoe. Kazan let himself go.

When they both arrived at the water's edge, Sandy Mac Trigger
tied the strap to the back of the canoe. He had a lot of fun
the idea of ​​what would follow and which was still part of the methods
dressage used on the Yukon.

As Sandy had, in fact, pushed out to sea, with a clear and sudden blow,
With the help of one of his oars, Kazan suddenly found himself in open water. There
the strap tightened, while Mac Trigger began to row, to
increase the speed of the boat.

Despite its great weakness, the animal was forced to swim, in order to
to keep his head above water and not sink to the bottom, And, in a game
diabolical, intended to increase his torment, Sandy continued to row
with all of his strenght. Caught in the eddies of the canoe, Kazan felt,
at times, its bushy head disappears into the river. Others
times, when he got back on his feet, swimming with an effort
desperate, it was the man who, with a hard blow from his oar,
plunged back into the water.

After a mile of this mode of travel, the wolf-dog, exhausted,
would soon be drowned. Only then did his master decide to
pull him on board and take him on board.

Brutal as it was, and by this very brutality, Sandy's system
Mac Trigger had achieved the desired result. Kazan had also become
submissive as a child. He no longer thought of his lost freedom and of fighting
again for her. His only wish was that the master would allow him to
remain lying at the bottom of the canoe, sheltered from the water and the club.
It lay between him and the man, a foot from his muzzle, and the
The coagulated blood he smelled there was his own blood.

For five days and five nights the descent of the river continued and the
Mac Trigger method, in order to properly instill in the wolf dog the
civilization, continued with three other beatings, which were
administered on land, and by additional recourse to the torture of
the water.

On the morning of the sixth day, man and beast reached Red Gold City
and Mac Trigger camped near the river. He got himself a steel chain,
used it to securely tie Kazan to a large stake, then cut
strap and muzzle.

--Now, he said to his prisoner, you will no longer be embarrassed to
eat. I want you to become strong again and as fierce as Hell...
The idea I'm mulling over is worth a whole load of furs! Yes yes,
it is a rich vein which will soon fill my pockets with gold dust.
I've done this before, and we'll do it again here. By the grace of God!
Here is finally a rich asset in my game!




XXVI

PROFESSOR WEYMAN SAY HIS WORD


Twice a day from now on, Sandy Mac Trigger brought food to Kazan.
fresh meat. He didn't give him any fish, or fat, or porridge.
flour, but only raw meat. One day he reported to him
five miles away, the still warm entrails of a caribou,
that he had been killed on purpose.

With this restorative diet, Kazan soon regained his health and
rebuild flesh and muscles. Mac Trigger no longer beat him,
and it was Kazan who welcomed him, at the end of his chain, growling and
baring his fangs.

One afternoon, Sandy brought another man with him. Kazan suddenly jumps
on the stranger, who had approached a little too close, and who jumped
back, with a muffled curse.

--It will do, he grunted. It is lighter by ten to fifteen
books than my Danish. But he has his fangs and speed... Before he
does not touch the ground, it will be a beautiful spectacle!

--Touch the ground... retorted Mac Trigger. I bet you twenty-five for
hundred of my share of profits that my beast will not be penniless.

--High five! said the other. How much longer until he is in
shape?

Sandy thought for a moment.

--A week... He won't have his full weight before.

The man nodded his head.

--So it will be for today in eight, in the evening.

And he added:

--Fifty percent from me, that my Danish will kill your champion.

Sandy MacTrigger looked at Kazan for a long time.

--I'll take you at your word, he said finally.

And shaking the stranger's hand:

--I don't think there is a single dog here in the Yukon that is
capable of overcoming this half-breed wolf.

The time was ripe to treat the people of Red Gold City to a celebration of
this genre. To distract themselves, they had games and gambling dens,
a few fights from time to time and the joys of alcohol. But the
presence of the Royal Police had put a brake on the excess of these
entertainment. Compared to the one we were carrying out, with several hundred
miles north, in the Dawson region[38] life was
austere and flat in Red Gold City.

  [38] Klondike Town.

The announcement of the fight organized by Sandy Mac Trigger and the owner
from the bar, Jan Harker, was greeted with many cheers. The new
spread it, under the cloak, twenty miles around and waved
all the brains.

During the week preceding the meeting, Kazan and the big Dane
were, in a back room of the bar, each exhibited in two cages of
wood, built on purpose.

Harker's dog was a crossbreed of a Great Dane and a mastiff. Born in
the Northland, he had worn the harness and pulled the sleds.

The betting fever began. They were for Danish, in the
proportion of two to one.

Sometimes they were three to one. People who risked
Kazan their money and their bread were old familiars of the
Wildness. They knew what strength and strength meant
endurance, the reddish glow that glowed in the wolfdog's eyes.

An old trapper, now a miner, confided, in a low voice, in the ear of
his neighbour:

--It is for this one that I will place my bet. He will beat the Dane flat out
sewing. The Danish will not have his know-how.

--But he has the weight, replied the man, who doubted. Look at me
jaws and shoulders...

--Look at yourself, interrupted the old trapper, your paws too
weak of your champion, his throat tender and too exposed to the fangs of the
wolfdog, and the heaviness of his stomach. For God's sake,
comrade, take my word for it! Don't put your money on Danish!

Other men took part in the discussion, each of whom considered
one of the two beasts.

Kazan, first of all, had growled towards all those faces that
surrounded him. Then he ended up lying down in a corner of the
cage, his head between his paws, and he looked at people, sullen and
silent.

On the evening of the fight, the large room of Jan Harker's bar was
completely cleared of its tables. Raised on a platform
three feet high, a large cage, ten feet square, around
which of the benches had been put away, occupied the middle of the room.
The upper part of this cage was open and, above,
hung from the ceiling two large kerosene lamps, equipped with
reflectors.

Three hundred spectators, who had each paid five dollars for entry,
were waiting for the arrival of the two gladiators.

The big Dane was the first to be introduced into the big cage. He
It was eight o'clock in the evening when Harker, Mac Trigger and two others
men brought into the room, using strong wooden stretchers
passed beneath her, the cage where Kazan was.

The Dane, who blinked under the harsh light of the reflectors,
wondering what they wanted from him, pricked up his ears when the
wolfdog was introduced near him.

But Kazan did not show his fangs and he barely stiffened
his paws for a few moments. This dog, which he did not know
not, he was indifferent. The Dane neither jumped nor growled. Kazan no
no longer interested him.

There was a murmur of disappointment among the audience. The big dane
turned his gaze towards the three hundred faces of brutes that surrounded him
and seemed to examine them curiously, waddling on his legs.
Kazan did the same.

A laugh of derision began to run over the lips of this crowd
tightly packed in the room, and who had come there for a
spectacle of death. Animal cries and jeers rang out
the address of Mac Trigger and Harker, and a growing clamor
rose, who demanded the promised battle or the reimbursement of the price
seats.

Sandy's face was purple with mortification and rage. On the
Harker's forehead the big blue veins bulged like
rolls, twice their normal size.

The bar owner shook his fist at the crowd and shouted:

--You're in a hurry, you idiots! Let them make contact!
Patience, please!

The tumult subsided and eyes returned to the cage again.
Kazan had, in fact, come to place himself in front of the enormous Dane and
he had started to stare at Kazan.

Then the wolfdog moved forward imperceptibly. With caution, he
prepared to pounce on his adversary, or to throw himself aside, if there
used to take place. The Dane imitated him. Both of their muscles stiffened.
We could now have heard the sound of a fly in the room.
Sandy and Harker, standing near the cage, were barely breathing.

The two beasts, equally splendid, the two wrestlers of so much
merciless battles, were going without a doubt, through the cruel
will of men, to fight their last duel. Already the two animals
clashed.

But, at that moment, what happened inside them? Is this O-se-ki, the Great
Spirit of Solitudes, which operated in their brain and made them understand
that, victims of human barbarity, they had towards each other a
imperative duty of fraternity?

Still, at the decisive second, while the whole room,
panting, expected a mutual body seizure, imminent and
fierce, we saw the big Dane slowly raise his head towards the lamps
oil and give a yawn.

Harker, who saw his champion offering his throat to the fangs of
Kazan, began to tremble in all his limbs and to utter horrible
blasphemies. Kazan, however, did not jump. The peace pact had been
mutually sealed between the two adversaries who, approaching each other
on the other, shoulder to shoulder, seemed to look with immense
disdain, through the bars of their prison, the crowd again
furious.

This time it was an explosion of anger, a threatening roar,
like that of a hurricane. Exasperated, Harker pulled from the case his
revolver and took aim at the big Dane.

But, above the tumult, a voice was raised.

--Stop! she said in a commanding tone. Stop in the name of
law!

There was a sudden silence and all the figures turned towards
the voice that spoke.

Two men stood on stools and towered over the
assistants.

One was Sergeant Brokaw of the North West Mounted Police. It is
he who had spoken. He held his hand raised, to command attention and
silence. The other was Professor Paul Weyman. It was he who,
protected by the raised hand of the sergeant, then spoke.

--I will give, he said, the owners five hundred dollars for these
dogs.

There was no one in the room who did not hear the offer thus made.

Harker looked at Sandy. Their two heads moved closer together.

--They don't want to fight, continued the one who had appeared, and they
will make excellent sled dogs. I will give to the owners
five hundred dollars.

Harker made a gesture indicating he wanted to speak.

--Give six hundred! Yes, six hundred, and the two animals are yours.

Professor Paul Weyman seemed hesitant. Then he nodded his head.

--I will pay six cents, he affirmed.

The crowd began to groan again. Harker climbed onto the platform which
supported the cage.

--I am not responsible, he claimed, any more than the owner
of the wolfdog, if they didn't want to fight! If, however, it is
among you, people who are not very sensitive enough to demand reimbursement of
their money, we will give it back to them when they leave! But we are innocent
of what is happening. The dogs tricked us, that's all.

Paul Weyman, accompanied by the sergeant, had made their way to the
cage and, while taking out of his pocket a wad of notes, from which he
counted three hundred to Jan Harker and three hundred to Sandy Mac Trigger, he
said in a low voice, to the two animals who were curiously considering him
through the bars:

--It's a big price, a huge price that I'm paying for you, my little ones
friends... But you will be useful to me to continue my journey and soon,
I hope we will be the best comrades in the world.




XXVII

ALONE IN HER BLINDNESS


Many hours after Kazan had fallen on the river bank, under the
gunshot from Sandy Mac Trigger, Gray Wolf waited for her faithful
companion came to find her. So many times he had come back to her
that she had confidence in his return. Flattened on her stomach, she
sniffed the air and groaned at not discovering the smell of the absent person there.
But all day Kazan did not reappear.

Day and night have long been the same for the she-wolf
blind. However, she felt, by a secret instinct, the hour when the
shadows grew thicker, and the moon and stars were to shine
on his head. But, with Kazan beside her, the terror of her blindness
was no longer the same. The same abyss of darkness did not seem to him
wrap it.

In vain she launched her appeal. Only the pungent smell of the
smoke rising from the fire lit by Mac Trigger on the sand. She
understood that it was this smoke, and the man who produced it, who
were the cause of Kazan's absence. But she didn't dare approach
too close his muffled and silent footsteps. She knew how to be patient and
thought that the next day his companion would return. She lay down under
a bush and fell asleep.

The warmth of the sun's rays told him that dawn had broken.
She got back on her feet and, worry prevailing over the
cautiously, she headed towards the river. The smell of smoke
disappeared as well as that of the man, but she heard the sound of
current, which guided it.

Chance made her fall back on the trail that, the day before, Kazan and she
had traced when they came to drink on the strip of sand.
She followed her and arrived without difficulty at the bank, at the very place where
Kazan had fallen and where Mac Trigger had camped.

There his muzzle encountered the coagulated blood of the wolfdog, mixed with the smell
which the man had left on the sand nearby. She found the
tree trunk to which his companion had been attached, the ashes
extinguished from the hearth, and followed the trail left by the
Kazan's body, when Mac Trigger had dragged him half-dead, behind
him, towards the dugout. Then all tracks disappeared.

Then Gray Wolf sat on her behind, turned her face towards the sky
blind and threw towards Kazan a desperate cry, like a sob that
the wind carried away on its wings. Then, going up the bank to the furthest
next bush, she lay down there, her nose turned towards the river.

She had known blindness, and now she knew loneliness,
which added further distress. What could she do here below?
now, without the protection of Kazan?

She heard, a few yards from her, the clucking of a partridge.
fir trees. It seemed to him that this noise was coming from another world. A
wood mouse passed between his front paws. She tried to
nip. But his teeth closed on a stone.

A real terror seized her. His shoulders tensed and
she was trembling, as if there had been a severe frost. Terror of the
sinister night that embraced him, she passed her claws over his eyes
closed, as if to open them to the light.

During the afternoon, she went wandering in the woods. But she was afraid
and did not take long to return to the shore of the river, and huddled against
the tree trunk near which the chained Kazan had slept his last
night. The smell of his companion was stronger there than elsewhere and, there
still, the ground was stained with his blood.

For the second time, dawn broke over the lonely blindness of Louve
Grey. As she was thirsty, she went down to the water and drank.
Although she had been fasting for two days, she did not think of
eat.

She could not see that the sky was black and that in the chaos of its
clouds slumbered a storm. But she felt the heaviness of the air,
the irritating influence of electricity, with which the atmosphere was charged,
and which discharged there in zigzags of lightning.

Then the thick pall stretched, from the south and the west, until
the extreme horizon, the thunder rolled and the she-wolf settled down further
against his tree trunk.

For several hours, the storm raged above her, in the
crack of lightning, and accompanied by a deluge of rain. When he
had finally calmed down, Gray Wolf shook herself and, her thoughts still fixed
towards Kazan which was already very far away at that time, she began to walk again
smell the sand. But the storm had washed away everything, the blood of Kazan and his
smell. No trace, no memory remained of him.

Gray Wolf's terror grew even more and, to the height of her misery, she
began to feel the hunger that gripped his stomach. She decided to
move away from the river and beat the wood again.

On several occasions, she scented various game which, each time,
escaped. Even a field mouse in her hole, which she dug out with its claws,
flew under his nose.

Growing hungrier and hungrier, she thought about the last meal she had eaten.
with Kazan. It had been made of a large rabbit, from which she
remembered that they had only eaten half. It was one or two
miles.

But the acuity of his flair and this inner sense of direction, if
powerfully developed in wild beasts, brought it back to this
same place, through trees, rocks and brush, as straight as a
pigeon returns to its dovecote.

A white fox had preceded her. At the place where she and Kazan had
hid the rabbit, she only found a few pieces of skin and a few
fur. What the fox had left, the elkbirds and the jays
bushes had in turn carried him away. On an empty stomach, Gray Wolf
returned towards the river, like towards a magnet from which she could not
detach.

The next night she slept again where Kazan had slept and, as a result,
three times she called him without getting an answer. A thick dew
fell, which would have completed erasing the last odor of the deceased, if
the storm had left some traces. And yet, three days
again, Gray Wolf persisted in remaining in this same place.

On the fourth day, her hunger was such that, to appease it, she had to
nibble the tender bark of willows. Then as she was drinking
in the river, she touched with her nose, on the sand of the bank, one of these
large molluscs found in the rivers of Northland and of which
the shell in the shape of a woman's comb; hence their name.

She brought it to the shore with her paws and, as the shell had
closed, she crushed it between her teeth. The flesh that was there
enclose was exquisite and she began looking for other “combs”. She
found enough to satisfy his hunger. So that she remained
there for three more days.

Then, one night, a sudden call rang through the air, which shook it with a
strange emotion. She stood up and, prey to a trembling of all her
limbs, she trotted up and down the sand, sometimes making
facing north, and sometimes south, then east and west. The head
thrown into the air, she breathed and listened, as if trying to
specify from what point on the horizon the mysterious call was coming.

This call came from far, far away, over the Wilderness. He
came from the Sun Rock, where she had lodged for so long with Kazan, from the Sun
Rock where she had lost her sight and where the darkness that enveloped her
now had, for the first time, weighed on his eyelids. It is
towards that distant place, where she had finished seeing the light and the
life, where the sun had ceased to appear to him in the blue sky, and
the stars and the moon in the pure night, that in its distress and its
in despair, she suddenly postponed her thoughts. There, surely,
she imagined, must be Kazan. So, confronting his blindness and
hunger, and all the obstacles that stood before it, all the
dangers which threatened her, she left, abandoning the river. Together
a hundred miles away was the Sun Rock, and it was towards it that she
was going to.




XXVIII

HOW SANDY MAC TRIGGER FOUND THE ENDING HE DESERVED


Kazan, meanwhile, sixty miles to the north, lay
end of his steel chain and observed Professor Paul Weyman, who
mixed fat and bran in a bucket for him.

The big Dane, for whom half the meal was intended, was lying
similarly, a few feet from Kazan, and its enormous jaws
were drooling, waiting for the feast that was being prepared.

The refusal of these two superb beasts to kill each other for the pleasure of
three hundred brutes, assembled on purpose, infinitely delighted the
worthy teacher. He had already drawn up the plan for a communication on
this incident.

It was the Dane that Paul Weyman first served. He brought him a
about liter of the succulent mash and, while, wagging his tail,
the dog kneaded her in his powerful jaws, he gave her on the
back a friendly flick.

His attitude was completely different when he headed towards Kazan. Very
cautiously he advanced, without wanting, however, to appear afraid.

Sandy, whom he had questioned at length, had told him the story of
the capture of Kazan and the escape of Gray Wolf. Paul Weyman had no doubt
not that chance would have made him find the same beast that he had
already in his possession and to whom he had released.

While considering that giving him this freedom had become useless,
since his wild companion had disappeared, undoubtedly forever, the
professor strove, with all his power, to obtain the good graces
from Kazan.

These advances were unsuccessful. They did not bring into the eyes of
wolfdog no glimmer of recognition. He didn't grumble at
Weyman's address and didn't try to bite his hands
when they were within reach. But he showed no desire
to become friends. The gray Dane, on the contrary, had quickly become
familiar and confident.

Sometimes, under one pretext or another, Mac Trigger came to give
visit to the small log cabin, only in the company of a servant
Paul Weyman lived on the shores of Great Slave Lake, an hour
about Red Gold City.

Then Kazan flew into a rage and pulled on his chain in leaps and bounds.
frantic, in order to throw themselves at his former master. Its fangs do not
did not stop glowing and he only calmed down when he found himself alone with
the teacher.

One day, as the same scene had happened again, Sandy Mac Trigger said to
Paul Weyman:

--It's a stupid job to try to make a friend!

Then he added abruptly:

--When do you start from here?

--In about a week, replied the professor. The first frosts
won't be long. I have to join Sergeant Conroy and his men at
Fort du Fond-du-Lac, October 1st.

--How do you make this trip?

--A canoe will come to pick me up with my luggage and, going up the
Peace River, will take me from here to Lake Athabasca[39].

  [39] Lake Athabasca, on which Fort du Fond-du-Lac is located,
    is located, as we have said, south of Great Slave Lake.
    The Peace River connects the two lakes. The distance is 350
    kilometers.

--And you will take with you all the mess that is in this
hut? I think you take the dogs too...

--Yes.

Sandy lit his pipe and, seemingly indifferently, whatever
the visible interest that this dialogue shone in his eyes:

--All these trips must be expensive, Professor?

--The last one that preceded this came back to me at about seven thousand
dollars. This will cost around five thousand. But I have various
subsidies.

--Good God! Sandy sighed. So you leave in eight
days?

--Roughly.

Sandy Mac Trigger withdrew, with a wicked smile in the corner of the room.
lip.

Paul Weyman watched him go.

“I have the idea,” he said to Kazan, “that this man is not worth much.
Maybe you're not wrong to always want to jump for his throat. He
apparently wanted me to take him as my guide.

He plunged his hands into his pockets and returned to the cabin.

Kazan, lying down, let his head fall between his paws, his eyes
wide open. The afternoon was already very late. We were soon at
mid-September and each night brought with it cold breaths
of autumn.

The wolfdog watched the last rays of the sun fade into the
southern sky. Then the darkness spread quickly. It was time
where his fierce desire for freedom was awakened. Night after night he
was eating away at the steel chain. Night after night he had looked at the moon and
the stars, and while the Great Dane lay asleep
long, surveyed the air to catch the call of Gray Wolf.

The cold that night was sharper than usual, and the bite
sharp and icy from the east wind agitated Kazan strangely. He him
ignited in the blood what the Indians call the “frenzy of
cold". The lethargic nights of summer were gone and time
was getting closer to the intoxicating, endless hunts. Kazan dreamed of
to leap into freedom, to run until exhaustion, with Gray Wolf at her back
side.

All night long he was prey to extraordinary agitation. He
said that Gray Wolf was waiting for him and he kept pulling on her
chain, uttering plaintive moans. Once he heard
far away a cry that he imagined was that of his companion. He answered it if
loudly that Paul Weyman was awakened from his deep sleep.

As dawn was near, the professor dressed and left the room.
hut. He immediately noticed the coldness of the air. He wet his fingers
and raised them above his head. By the side of the fingers which had
as soon as it dried, he noticed that the wind had moved back to the north. He began
laughing under their breath and, going towards Kazan:

--This cold, old man! will destroy the last flies. In some
days we will be gone. The canoe that will take us must be in
road...

During the day Paul Weyman sent his servant to Red Gold
City, for some shopping, and he authorized her to return only on
next morning. He himself busied himself with making his travel arrangements,
packing your luggage and sorting your notes.

The night that followed was calm and clear. While Weyman slept
inside the cabin, outside, the Great Dane was doing the same,
end of his chain. Alone, Kazan was only dozing, his muzzle between
its paws, eyelids half-closed.

Although he was less agitated than the previous night, he raised his head,
from time to time, sniffing the air.

Suddenly, the snap of a twig on the ground startled him. He
opened his eyes fully and sniffed. Immediate danger was in
the air. The big Dane continued to sleep.

A few minutes later, a shadowy shape appeared in the fir trees,
behind the cabin. She approached cautiously, her head lowered, her
shoulders hunched. Yet, by the light of the stars, Kazan was not long
to recognize the sinister face of Sandy Mac Trigger. He didn't move
not, following the custom of the wolf, and pretended to see nothing, to see nothing
hear.

Mac Trigger, this time, had neither whip nor club in his hand. But he
held a revolver, the polished barrel of which sparkled imperceptibly. He
walked around the cabin, with silent steps, and arrived in front of the door,
which he was preparing to push in with a brief and violent shoulder thrust.

Kazan watched his every move. He crawled on himself, forgetting his
chain. Every ounce of strength in his powerful body gathered on
herself to jump.

He jumped, and the momentum was such that one of the steel rings, weaker than
the others gave in, with a dry noise. Before Sandy Mac Trigger had
By the time he turned around and stood guard, the wolfdog was
his throat.

With a cry of terror, the man capsized and, as he rolled on the
ground, the deep voice of the big Dane who was pulling on his chain, growled in a
thunder of alarm.

Paul Weyman, awake, was dressing. On the bloody earth, the bandit,
mortally wounded and the jugular vein severed, twisted in his
agony.

Kazan looked at the stars that shone above his head, the black
fir trees that surrounded it. He listened to the whisper of the wind in the branches.
Here were the men. Out there, somewhere, was Gray Wolf. And he
was free.

His ears flattened and he sped off into the darkness.




XXIX

THE CALL OF SUN ROCK


Ears folded, tail low and hanging on the ground, train
from behind half crushed, like that of the wolf who runs away in fear
faced with danger, Kazan fled at full speed, pursued by the death rattle of
the human voice of Sandy Mac Trigger. He didn't stop until he had
traveled a good mile.

So, for the first time in weeks, he sat down on his
train behind and uttered towards the sky a vibrant and deep appeal,
that the echoes repeated in the distance.

It was not Gray Wolf who answered, but the voice of the big Dane.
Paul Weyman, leaning over the motionless corpse of Sandy Mac Trigger,
heard the howl of the wolfdog. He listened, listening if
the call would be repeated. But Kazan had already quickly left.

The sharp, cold air which, above the immense Barrens, reached him from
the Arctic, the myriads of stars that shone above his head
in the vast sky, the happiness finally of freedom reconquered, him
had restored all his confidence and still excited the elasticity of
his race.

He galloped straight ahead, like a dog following, without anything
distracts him from it, the trail of his master.

Bypassing Red Gold City and turning its back on Great Slave Lake,
he cut short through woods and bushes, plains, swamps and ridges
rocky areas, heading towards the Mac Farlane River. When he had it
reached, he immediately undertook to go up its course, forty miles
during. He had no doubt that, just as Gray Wolf had often
expected, she was still waiting for him, in the same place, on the bank where
he himself had been captured.

At daybreak, he had arrived at his goal, full of hope and
trust. He looked around him, looking for his companion, and he
moaned softly, and wagged his tail. Gray Wolf was not there.

He sat on his rear and released his male call into the air. Nothing
voice did not answer him. He then began to sniff and search everywhere.

A thousand trails intersected and, all day long, he followed them
Alternatively. Still without success. So in vain he renewed,
several times, his call.

Work similar to that which had taken place at Louve Grise took place
produced in his brain. No doubt the one he was looking for and who
had disappeared, he would find her in one of the places where both
had lived.

He thought first of the hollow tree, in the hospitable swamp where
had passed the previous winter. And, as soon as the misty night had
invaded the sky, it resumed its course. O-se-ki, the Great Spirit,
leaned over him and directed his steps[40].

  [40] We know that, like the wolf, the dog is susceptible to
    to travel, without getting lost, considerable distances and to follow
    a fixed direction towards the goal he has set for himself. We saw
    dogs which, during Napoleon's campaigns, had accompanied
    soldiers all the way to Russia and Moscow returning alone through
    all of Europe, their master having died, and return to France or
    Italy, their former home.

Day and night, under the autumn sun as under the stars, he ran
without respite through hills and valleys. Sometimes exhausted and falling
starvation, he killed a rabbit and ate a few mouthfuls, then
slept for an hour or two, only to get up and then leave again.

On the fourth night he reached the valley which descended towards the
swamp.

He followed the course of the torrent and passed, without paying attention, near
the first colony of beavers. But when he arrived at the second
city, raised by Brokentooth and his troop, he found himself completely
disappointed. He had forgotten that.

Brokentooth and his workers had completed and perfected their work.
The artificial pond which covered the swamp had further increased its
surface and the hollow tree, a cozy nest against the frost, had
completely disappeared. The landscape itself was unrecognizable.

Kazan remained motionless and stunned, in front of all this water, sniffing
the air in silence, the air permeated with the nauseating odor of the usurpers.

Then his courage failed him, his fine endurance fell. Its paws
were sore from the long, arduous hike. His ribs, emaciated
due to insufficient food, protruded. All day long,
he walked around the pond and searched. The hairy crest on his back
had become flattened and the sagging of her shoulders, the mobile gaze and
worried about his eyes giving him the appearance of a hunted beast. From here
again, Gray Wolf was gone!

She too, however, had been there. As he smelled all along the
torrent, a little upstream of the pond, Kazan discovered a small pile of
broken river shells. These were the reliefs of a meal of the
blind wolf.

Kazan sniffed the almost faded scent of Gray Wolf, then he slipped
under an old stump and fell asleep crying. His sorrow increased
still in his sleep and, while sleeping, he moaned like a
child. Then he calmed down, another vision suddenly crossed his brain,
and barely had dawn appeared before he resumed his rapid course,
right in front of him.

During this same time, under the golden rays of the autumn sun, a
man and a woman, accompanied by a child, were returning to their
canoe towards Sun Rock. It did not take long for them to see appear, at a
bend of the river, above the heads of the fir trees, the eyebrow-raising tops of
the steep rock, which they knew well.

The young woman was a little pale and thin, and her cheeks, which
had lost their former shine, were barely beginning, under
the influence of the great outdoors, to regain their rosy freshness.
It was civilization and the six-month stay in the cities that
had thus made her anemic.

--Jeanne, said the man, my dear Jeanne, I believe that doctors
were right in advising me to bring you back with me, for a
new hunting season, towards this beautiful and wild nature where
spent your youth, with your old father, and without whom you would not know
live. Are you happy now?

The young woman began to smile.

And, as the canoe passed in sight of a long sandy peninsula
white who, from the shore, stretched out into the river:

--It's here, she said, do you remember? that our old friend, the
wolf dog, has distorted our society. I recognize the place. His wife
abandoned, the blind wolf, was there, on the sand, calling to him.
So he took a dip in the water... I wonder where they've been since
have gone... As for us, we will soon arrive.

The old cabin was still in place, such as Jeanne and her husband
had left her. Alone, the Virginia creeper and other plants
climbing plants had covered it. The shutters and the door were still
closed, with their crossbars nailed. All around had
wild herbs grew excessively.

It was reopened, not without emotion. While the husband unloaded
the canoe the baggage and all its series of traps, Jeanne
was already starting to put her house back together, and baby Jeanne, who was
became a nice little girl, enjoyed playing around to her heart's content and
to chatter.

As dusk fell and as baby Jeanne, tired of the journey,
had already gone to bed and fell asleep, Jeanne and her husband all sat down
two on the threshold of the cabin, in order to enjoy the ultimate beauty of
these autumnal days, which the harsh winter would soon follow.

Suddenly they started.

--Did you hear? said the man to the young woman, whose hand he was caressing.
hand the silky hair.

--Yes, I heard... she replied.

And his voice trembled.

--It wasn't his voice. It was rather that of the other, the same
call that the blind wolf made on the strip of sand.

The man nodded.

Jeanne nervously grabbed her husband's arm.

--No doubt, she continued, they are still there, or, like us,
did they come back.

Then, after a silence:

--Listen to me, my friend! Will you promise me, during this winter, to
neither hunt nor trap wolves? If something bad happened to these two
poor beasts, I would be inconsolable.

The man replied:

--Your thinking matches mine... Yes, I promise you.

The night was quickly rising in the sky, which was beginning to fill
of stars.

For the second time the wailing call sounded. No doubt was
no more possible. The voice came directly from Sun Rock.

—But, and him, murmured Jeanne, with a little anguish. Where is he?

At that moment, a confused shape leapt into the shadows.

--It's him! shouted the young woman. It's him! Here it is!

Already Kazan was towards her, barking and jumping, and waving his plume
of his tail.

--He recognizes you, my word! said the husband laughing, and his passion for
you are still the same.

Very happy, Jeanne caressed the animal, passing her hand through the fur
rough and pampering the big bushy head in his arms.

Suddenly, the plaintive call, which seemed to come from the Sun Rock, resonated
new. Immediately, as if struck by a whip, Kazan jumped up and,
debating, suddenly escaped from Jeanne's crazy embrace.
The next moment, he was gone.

The young woman was very moved. Almost panting, she turned to
her husband, who had become thoughtful.

--You see, she said to him, that there is a God of the Wild, a God who gave
a soul, even to wild beasts. In the solitary immensity of the Great
White Desert, animals are our brothers. And that is why this God
tells us: “You shall not kill them.”

--I believe it, my darling Jeanne, murmured the man.

We must respect life... Except, alas! to defend and nourish
ours. Here, where we are face to face with nature and the vast sky,
things appear different from what they seem to us in
the cities.

Night had completely fallen. The brightness of the stars was reflected in
the eyes of Jeanne, who had rested her head languidly on the
chest of her husband.

--This wild world is beautiful! she said. Our old friend didn't tell us
not forgotten, and he had always remained faithful to her. I have
trust that he will come back to see us, from time to time, as he
used to do.

His eyelids closed little by little. In the distance, we heard,
from time to time, cries of voices, followed by long silences.

It was Kazan who was hunting, side by side with Gray Wolf, under the light
opalescent of the moon which rose, bathing in its soft clarity
plains and forests.


END


(Translators’ Notes.)




CONTENTS


                                                                   Pages
  Preface of the Translators I
       I.--Bewitchment 1
      II.--The return to the Northern Land 8
     III.--The duel 16
      IV.--Free from serfdom 26
       V.--Kazan meets Gray Wolf 29
      VI.--The attack on the sleigh 40
     VII.--Kazan rediscovers the caress of Jeanne 49
    VIII.--The intersign of death 69
      IX.--On the frozen river 66
       X.--The great change 76
      XI.--The tragedy on the Sun Rock 83
     XII.--In the days of fire 93
    XIII.--Professor Paul Weyman photographs Kazan and
             Gray Wolf 102
     XIV.--The Red Death 117
      XV.--The trail of hunger 129
     XVI.--Towards the priesthood 137
    XVII.--For the love of the she-wolf 142
   XVIII.--The Carnival of the Wild 148
     XIX.--A son of Kazan 158
      XX.--The education of Bari 168
     XXI.--Broken Tooth emigrates with his family 176
    XXII.--The fight against the invaders 184
   XXIII.--The otter makes a gap 192
    XXIV.--The capture 199
     XXV.--The method of Sandy Mac Trigger 208
    XXVI.--Professor Weyman says his word 216
   XXVII.--Alone in her blindness 222
  XXVIII.--How Sandy Mac Trigger met the end he deserved 228
    XXIX.--The call of the Sun Rock 234




    COMPLETED PRINTING JANUARY 16, 1925
    BY FLOCH PRINTING WORKS, IN MAYENNE,
    FOR EDITIONS G. CRÈS ET Cie.





        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KAZAN ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by US copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by US copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It can only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1 C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    anything. You can copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by US copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You can convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinuous
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by US copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Yew
the second copy is also defective, you may request a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The disability or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
US federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. US laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of others
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the US unless a copyright notice is included. So, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
editing.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

